Skip to main content
Search

 UPLOAD
 SIGN UP | LOG IN
 
 
 
 
 
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE  CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
Full text of "The Economist Magazine, 4 June 2021"
See other formats
How AMLO could ruin Mexico 


aware idcevdcomehomalh? 


F eee nae Belarus: pirate and pariah 
6 O n O mM I S t The capex bonanza 


MAY 29TH-JUNE 4TH 2021 





Two states or one? 


The hopeless peace process 





DOWNLOAD 


CSS Notes, Books, MCQs, Magazines 


Yes We Can Do It! 


yW. THECSSPOINT.COM 


e Download CSS Notes 

e Download CSS Books 

e Download CSS Magazines 
e Download CSS MCQs 

e Download CSS Past Papers 


The CSS Point, Pakistan's The Best 
Online FREE Web source for All CSS 
Aspirants. 


Email: info@thecsspoint.com 








_-@B00Ks BAZAR 


ONLINE BOOKS STORE 





SUKKUR IBA TESTING SERVICE (STS) 


PST | JEST GUIDE BY CARAVAN 
2021 EDITION 





wan THE MOST AUTHENTIC 


SUKKUR IBA TESTING SERVICE (STS) 










Based on the Sindh Textbook Board Syllabus 
as, Announced by the School Education and 
Literacy Department (Govt. of Sindh) 


® Part4 (Mother Tongue (Sindhi/Urdu) 15 Questions 
® Part-l (S. Studies, C.A,G.K / Islamiyat/ 15 Questions 
C. Knowledge) 


® Part4ll (English) 20 Cnetions 


* Part-4V (Mathematics) 25 Questions 
25 Questions 


a Ae ae one 





Compiled by 
Ch. Ahmad Najib 


° ~ 
- =e i -——_s * 
a -3* -< 
. . ee 
~? 
2 
= 
Se et wee a= se E.# 
= = “eS a re" 
“s+ 





CALL/SMS 0726540141 - 03336042057 


BUY CSS SOLVED MCQs BOOKS ONLINE CASH ON DELIVERY 
CALL/SMS 03336042057 | Visit: http://cssbooks.net 





+ ’ 
ta Ve 


INTERNATIONAL 
RELATIONS 


Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs) 





[ne CSS, PMS 
MA IR, MA Pol. Science 


& All Other Relevant Exar 





PP3C, KPPSC, SPs, “2 


BPSC, FPS, ‘ 


Admission > 
% 





mee Science 


posses & Ability 


MCQs with Answers & Detailed Explanations | Previous Years Solved MCQs 





& ~priv/Phd 
% ent Test | 
. fet NTS, GAT suasect 
Competitive Examinations 


Shah Nawaz 









JAHANGIR'S 


Exam Essentials iLMI 


HISTORY OF USA 


(MCQs) 


IAHANOIS DS 
L Times | 
T 


CSS, PMS, PCS 


& All Other Competitive Exams 


for 
CSS, PMS, PCS 


& All Other Relevant Exams 


Compiled by 
i Umair Khan 
i ¥ . | | : a 

a l anes | il 
_—————: od 


_ Imran Bashir (PMs) 


Rai Muhammad Iqbal Kharal 





Revit 


The Economist May 29th 2021 








On the cover 


The Israeli-Palestinian peace 
process has become an 
obstacle to progress: leader, 
page 11. The ideal of two states 
has failed. It has left the Holy 
Land looking like one unequal 
state, page 39 


How AMLO could ruin Mexico 
Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador 
pursues bad policies by 


improper means: leader, page 14. 


Elections on June 6th will 
determine how deeply—and 
ruinously—he can transform his 
country: briefing, page 18 


Did covid-19 come from a lab? 
How can the world prepare for 
a future pandemic when it does 
not know where this one came 
from? Page 53. What to make of 
the lab theory, page 54. 
Improving the ventilation of 
buildings will help curb covid-19, 
page 71. The case for clean air: 
leader, page 173 


The capex bonanza Firms are 
rediscovering their love for 
investment: leader, page 72. 
We analyse their plans, page 63 


Belarus: pirate and pariah 
Having hijacked a Ryanair plane, 
it has only one friend to turn to, 
page 44. Russia puts the Czech 
Republic on an official enemies 
list, page 45 


> Activating the digital 
element of your subscription 
means that you can search our 
archive, read all of our daily 
journalism and listen to audio 
versions of our stories. Just 
visit economist.com/activate 


7 


11 


12 


13 


14 


17 


18 


The world this week 


A summary of political 
and business news 





Leaders 


Israel and Palestine 
Two states or one? 


Corporate investment 
Innovation nations 


The euro zone 
Take one for the team 


Ventilation 
Fresh thinking about 
fresh air 


Mexico 
The false messiah 


Letters 


On digital currencies, 
technology and China, 
Wyoming, ice hockey 


Briefing 

Mexico’s populist 
president 

The unnoticed radical 


Free exchange When 
does transitory inflation 
become sustained? Some 
lessons from the1970s, 


page 70 





21 
22 
23 
23 
24 
25 
26 


27 
28 
30 
30 


32 
33 
33 
34 
35 


36 
37 
38 


39 


42 
42 
43 


United States 

Texas moves righter 
The George Floyd Act 
Central America 
Infrastructure year 
Wildlife wars 

New York’s new island 


Lexington The Kamala 
dilemma 


The Americas 

Patronage in Brazil 
Chile’s new constitution 
The Shining Path returns 
Canada’s Butter Rage 


Asia 

Myanmar’s worried 
investors 

Commerce after a coup 
Islamists in Bangladesh 
Australia’s frisky whales 
India’s crisis eases 


Banyan China loses the 
Philippines 


China 
Inequality in education 
Hazing at weddings 


Chaguan A revealing 
Afghan strategy 


Middle East & Africa 


One-state reality in 
the Holy Land 


Islam and homosexuality 
Mali’s coup within a coup 
A vicious jihadist is dead 





»» Contents continues overleaf 


6 BM@elcaas 






Europe 
44 Belarus hijacks a plane 
45 Russia's Czech problem 


46 A Turkish mobster takes 
on the government 


46 Norwegian folk music 
47 Parisian voters 


48 Charlemagne How 
farmers still rule Europe 


Britain 
49 The BBCs problems 
50 An Australian trade deal 
52 Bagehot Mr Levelling Up 


International 


53 Where covid-19 came 
from 


54 The likelihood ofa 
laboratory origin 


Business 
57 The future of Big Oil 
59 China's logistics race 


59 Chinese tech’s online 
binge 
60 A rare DAX mega-merger 


60 Refloating the cruise 
industry 


61 Bartleby Decision fatigue 


62 Schumpeter Strategic 
u-turns 


ite 
EcoOnmoOMmIst 


Volume 439 Number 9247 


Published since September 1843 

to take part in ‘a severe contest between 
intelligence, which presses forward, 

and an unworthy, timid ignorance 
obstructing our progress.” 


Editorial offices in London and also: 
Amsterdam, Beijing, Berlin, Brussels, Chicago, 
Dakar, Dallas, Dubai, Johannesburg, Madrid, 
Mexico City, Moscow, Mumbai, New Delhi, New 
York, Paris, San Francisco, Sao Paulo, Seoul, 
Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo, Washington DC 








Subscription service 

For our full range of subscription offers, including 
digital only or print and digital bundled, visit: 
Economist.com/offers 


If you are experiencing problems when trying to 
subscribe, please visit our Help pages at: 
www.economist.com/help for troubleshooting 
advice. 


Finance & economics 
63 An investment bonanza 
64 Recovery in the euro zone 


66 Buttonwood The 
crypto-fiat divide 


67 How to end the pandemic 


67 America’s housing market 


68 Morbid finance in France 
69 Chasing Chinese assets 


70 Free exchange Inflation 
and the 1970s 


Science & technology 


71 How covid-19 really 
Spreads 


74 Eunuch GM mosquitoes 
74 Autonomous weapons 
75 A better fog trap 


Books & arts 


76 History and memory in 
Russia 


77 Satirical fiction 

78 Cosmopolitan Prague 
78 Ahistory of censorship 
79 Persian music 


The Economist May 29th 2021 











Economic & financial indicators 


80 Statistics on 42 economies 





























Graphic detail 


81 Educated voters’ leftward shift is surprisingly old 


Obituary 


82 Yuan Longping, feeder of China and the world 


The best way to contact our Customer Service 
team is via phone or live chat. You can contact us 
on the below numbers; please check our website 
for up to date opening hours. 


North America: 
Latin America & Mexico: 


+1 800 456 6086 
+1 636 449 5702 


Please 
C ¥recycle 


® 
PEFC 


PEFC/29-31-58 





PEFC certified 

This copy of The Economist 
is printed on paper sourced 
from sustainably managed 
forests certified to PEFC 
www.pefc.org 


© 2021 The Economist Newspaper Limited. All rights reserved. Neither this publication nor any part of it may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of The Economist Newspaper Limited. The Economist (ISSN 0013-0613) is published every week, except for a year-end double issue, by The Economist Newspaper Limited, 750 3rd 
Avenue, 5th Floor, New York, N Y 10017. The Economist is a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited. Periodicals postage paid at New York, NY and additional mailing offices. Postmaster: Send address changes to The 
Economist, P.O. Box 46978, St. Louis , MO. 63146-6978, USA. Canada Post publications mail (Canadian distribution) sales agreement no. 40012331. Return undeliverable Canadian addresses to The Economist, PO Box 7258 STN A, Toronto, 
ON M5W 1X9. GST R123236267. Printed by Quad/Graphics, Saratoga Springs, NY 12866 





The world this week Politics 





Belarus hijacked a Ryanair 
plane flying from one EU coun- 
try (Greece) to another (Lithua- 
nia) with more than 100 people 
on board. The plane was in 
Belarusian airspace. Citing a 
“bomb threat”, the authorities 
sent a fighter jet to make it 
land in Minsk, the Belarusian 
capital. They arrested two 
passengers: Roman Protasev- 
ich, an exiled journalist, and 
his girlfriend. Mr Protasevich 
had rallied opposition to Alex- 
ander Lukashenko, the despot 
who stole Belarus’s presi- 
dential election last year. No 
bomb was found. Russia 
applauded Mr Lukashenko’s 
boldness; the EU mulled sanc- 
tions on his isolated regime. 


Switzerland said it was walk- 
ing away from years of negoti- 
ations on anewtreaty with the 
EU aimed at harmonising 
dozens of messy individual 
deals on trade, investment and 
the movement of people. 


Police in India visited Twitter’s 
offices after it added a warning 
of misinformation to tweets 
posted by members of the 
ruling party. The tweets pur- 
ported to detail plans drawn up 
by the opposition to discredit 
the government’s handling of 
the pandemic, but fact-check- 
ing organisations said the 
documents were fake. 


America warned its citizens 
not to travel to Japan, after an 
increase in the number of 
covid-19 cases there. A survey 
suggested that 80% of Japan- 
ese believe the Olympic games, 
which are due to begin in 
Tokyo in July, should be post- 
poned again or cancelled. 


China responded angrily to an 
American call for more 
investigations into the origin 


of the coronavirus. A foreign 
ministry spokesman accused 
America of smearing China 
and of ignoring the possibility 
that the virus originated in the 
United States. 


Twenty-one competitors ina 
100km ultra-marathon ina 
mountainous area of western 
China were killed by extreme 
weather, including hail. 


The Texas legislature passed a 
bill that allows the state’s 
residents to carry a handgun 
without a licence. The law sets 
up an online course in gun 
Safety for people unsure about 
how to handle weapons. 


Israel and Hamas, the militant 
Islamist group that controls 
Gaza, stuck to a recently 
agreed ceasefire. To bolster the 
truce Antony Blinken, Amer- 
ica’s secretary of state, held 
Separate meetings with Binya- 
min Netanyahu, Israel’s prime 
minister, and Mahmoud 
Abbas, the president of the 
Palestinian Authority. He also 
went to Egypt and Jordan. 


Republicans in the American 
Congress introduced legisla- 
tion to beef up the govern- 
ment’s monitoring of anti- 
Semitic attacks. The conflict 
between Israel and Hamas has 
led to a “dangerous and drastic 
surge in anti-Jewish hate” in 
America, Britain and other 
countries, according to the 
Anti-Defamation League, a 
civil-rights group. 


Iran’s Guardian Council 
disqualified most of the candi- 
dates who registered to run in 
the presidential election on 
June 18th. Only seven candi- 
dates, mostly hardline and 
pious, were allowed on the 
ballot. The conservative judi- 
ciary chief, Ebrahim Raisi, is 
the front-runner to succeed 
Hassan Rouhani, who is rela- 
tively moderate. 


Iran reached a deal with the 
International Atomic Energy 
Agency to extend fora month 
an agreement that allows 
international monitors to 
inspect its nuclear 


| programme. The head of the 


agency Said he was very con- 
cerned about Iran’s claim to be 
enriching uranium toa purity 
level of 60%, a level only coun- 
tries that are making bombs 
attempt to reach. 


Abubakar Shekau, the leader of 
Boko Haram, a jihadist group 
that enslaves girls, reportedly 
died in Nigeria after blowing 
himself up to avoid capture by 
rival jihadists. Mr Shekau has 
been declared dead five times 
before, only to resurface. But 
this time the reports appear to 
be true. 


Army officers in Mali forced 
the president and prime min- 
ister to resign because they 
were upset about a reshuffling 
of the cabinet. The same offi- 
cers carried out a coup last 
September. 


After years of dodge and 
deferment, Jacob Zuma, a 
former president of South 
Africa, appeared in court. He 
faces 18 charges relating to an 
arms deal signed by the gov- 
ernment in the late1990s, 
including an allegation that he 
accepted a bribe from Thales, a 
French defence firm. Both he 
and the firm deny the charges. 


In Peru 16 people were massa- 
cred ina village ina region 
known for cocaine production. 
The authorities blamed Marx- 
ist Shining Path militants, who 
killed tens of thousands of 
people in the 1980s and 1990s. 
The killings came two weeks 
ahead of a tense presidential 
run-off, which pits Keiko 
Fujimori, the daughter ofa 
former president convicted of 
corruption, against Pedro 
Castillo, a left-wing activist. 


In Mexico the police chief of 
Sinaloa state, the name of 
which is associated witha 
powerful drug cartel, was 
murdered by bandits who fired 
200 bullets into his car. 


A soldier in Canada was 
charged with mutiny for the 
first time in decades. The 
reservist is accused of trying to 
persuade other soldiers to join 
him to disrupt the distribution 
of covid-19 vaccines. 


The Economist May 29th 2021 7 


Coronavirus briefs 
To 6am GMT May 27th 2021 


Weekly confirmed cases by area, m 


India 







Western Europe 


2020 2021 


Vaccination doses on atedurounints 
_— Total‘000 1stdose 2nd 
Israel 10,568 98 92 
UAE 12,416 95 60 
Bhutan 483 95 O 
Mongolia 2,730 90 44 
Malta 491 87 50 
Maldives 465 75 39 
Britain 61,995 74. 45 
Chile 17,794 70 55 
Bahrain 1,621 68 56 
Canada 21,638 67 6 
United States 287,789 66 50 


Sources: Johns Hopkins University CSSE; 
Our World in Data; United Nations 


The number of officially 
recorded cases in India con- 
tinued to fall, on one day 
dropping below 200,000 for 
the first time in weeks. 


Germany banned most visi- 
tors from Britain because of 
the spreading Indian variant 
of covid-19 in that country. 
French officials said people 
entering from Britain would 
have to quarantine, but 
stopped short of an outright 
ban. Research in Britain, 
meanwhile, found that two 
doses of either the Astra- 
Zeneca or Pfizer vaccine pro- 
vide good protection against 
the Indian variant. 


An outbreak of the variant in 
Melbourne led to a new lock- 
down in the Australian state 
of Victoria, a disappointment 
for the city, which last year 
had one of the world’s longest 
lockdowns. Vaccination rates 
in Australia remain very low. 


Argentina entered a nine-day 
lockdown. Cases are surging 
amid a slow take-up of the jab. 


> For our latest coverage of the 
virus please visit economist.com/ 
coronavirus or download the 
Economist app. 





NEW ROUTES TO 
NEW CUSTOMERS 


E-COMMERCE AT THE SPEED OF NOW d 

rs 
mJUlsi/alcsstow ou evar=lale|ialemelalemual= United States Postal Service 
[xejar-laleliale Miia mie AoMcome)ii-/al ale m-m1ex0)anlan(>\ge1omcye) 6] te) als 
1ice)aarots)em c=) |(-le)(>ms\a}|©)@)i ale mem c-li6laa\swale|almice)sam-la\varcle(e|gowsts 
in America. Find out more at usps.c 






;om/newroutes. 


a 


Yotat-relUII-to Ke VIM -YAVAe -lice-lateh tlaat-Kel-\e\-\ale Rola Key igi, es ile 
information, visit the Postage Calculator at http://g 











© The world this week Business 


Singapore’s first-quarter GDP 
figure was revised, revealing a 
much faster expansion than 
had been thought. The econ- 
omy grew by 3.1% compared 
with the previous three 
months; manufacturing out- 
put was up by 10.8%. 








Joe Biden confirmed that he 
would not impose sanctions 
on the corporation that built 
the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, 
which will transport gas from 
Russia to Germany. Critics 
contend the project’s main 
purpose is to increase Euro- 
pean reliance on Russian 
energy, but Mr Biden said that 
sanctions would be counter- 
productive, given that the 
pipeline is almost complete. 
The decision is a win for the 
German government, anda 
blow to Ukraine, which will 
lose income from transit fees 
for Russian gas. 





At least two directors nominat- 
ed by Engine No.1, asmall, 
environmentally minded 
hedge fund, were elected by 
shareholders to the board of 
ExxonMobil. It is the most 
significant victory yet in the 
push by activist investors to 
force big oil companies to do 
more on climate change. 


Environmental legacy 

In a ruling with ramifications 
for the whole oil industry, a 
Dutch court sided with green 
campaigners and found that 
Shell was in part responsible 
for climate change, ordering it 
to cut its carbon emissions by 
45% by 2030 from 2019 levels. 
Shell currently aims to lower 
emissions by 20% in 2030 and 
45% in 2035 from 2016 levels. It 
is to appeal against the verdict. 


Turkey’s president sacked a 
deputy governor at the coun- 
try’s central bank, the third 
defenestration of a senior 
official within two months. 
Recep Tayyip Erdogan has 
whittled away at the central 
bank’s independence over the 
years in his attempt to sup- 
press interest rates, replacing 
the governor with a supporter 
in March. Since then the lira 
has slid by 15%. 


Activist investors have in- 
creased their clout during this 
year's Shareholders’ meetings 
ina wide range of industries. 
This week Aston Martin faced 
down a mini revolt, when 18% 
of shareholders opposed its 
pay policy for directors and 
17% went against the re-elec- 
tion of Lawrence Stroll as 
chairman. Mr Stroll is credited 
with rescuing the struggling 
sports-car maker with an 
injection of capital in 2020. 


Germany’s two biggest proper- 
ty companies, Vonovia and 
Deutsche Wohnen, agreed to 
merge, creating Europe’s larg- 
est residential real-estate 
group. The deal is contro- 
verSial. Rents have soared in 
Berlin, producing a political 
backlash. The firms gave assur- 
ances that they would limit 
rent increases to1% a year in 
Berlin for the next three years 
and provide flats for young 
families at below market rents. 


1)" 1 7 LH 
owe jae 
ot eae 
BS ad : 
ane aaa 
y at 
‘ rueaail 
rat Pe ae te 
rierig a as 
fit 


Uber said it would allow its 
drivers in Britain tojoina 
union, the first time that the 
ride-hailing company has 
given Official recognition toa 
union in any country. In Feb- 
ruary Britain’s Supreme Court 
ruled that Uber must extend 
employee rights, suchasa 
minimum wage, to its drivers. 


The fallout from the collapse 
of Greensill Capital, a financ- 
ing firm, spread to Italy, where 
the central bank pushed Aigis 
Banca, a specialist lender 
based in Milan, into liquida- 
tion. A basket of Aigis’s assets, 
were sold to another Italian 
bank for €1 ($1.20). 


The city of Washington, DC, 
sued Amazon, claiming that 
the retailer forced third-party 
sellers to agree not to sell their 
wares at lower prices any- 
where else on the internet. 
Amazon, which also faces 
investigations in Europe and 
India, said it would fight the 
lawsuit. Meanwhile, Amazon 
secured its deal to buy MGM, 
paying $8.45bn for the film 
studio. 


WhatsApp, a popular encrypt- 
ed-messaging service owned 
by Facebook, said it was suing 
the government of India over 
new rules requiring it to be 
able to trace messages sent on 


Yall aati “ier wee a a ie 


a lo \ Hi A al | 


= 


Gites kine 





The Economist May 29th 2021 


its platform. WhatsApp has 
long used privacy as a selling- 
point; it the most popular 
messaging-app in India. 


The first private licence to 
operate mobile services in 
Ethiopia was awarded toa 
consortium that includes 
Vodafone. The bid for a second 
licence from MTN, a South 
African company, was rejected 
as too low. The liberalisation of 
Ethiopia’s telecoms 1s a proxy 
in the tech war between Amer- 
ica and China. The winning bid 
is supported by Washington 
through low-cost foreign-aid 
loans; MTN’S proposal was 
backed in part by a Chinese 
State investor. 





No passport required 
Following an aborted launch in 
December, Virgin Galactic 
conducted a successful test 
flight of its vss Unity space- 
craft, which touched down in 
New Mexico after reaching an 
altitude of 55.45 miles 
(89.2km). The company hopes 
to put paying passengers into 
orbit next year. Blue Origin, a 
Space-tourism venture backed 
by Jeff Bezos, will send its first 
paying passenger into space on 
July 2oth. The current bid for 
the tourist seat to be occupied 
by the lucky (and brave) person 
on that mission is $2.8m. 


=| WHEN PUTIN 
LKASHEO 


ite 


Economist 









































Two states or one? 


The peace process has become an obstacle to progress 


AVE MORE time and effort ever been devoted to peace to so 

little effect? America began overseeing talks between the Is- 
raelis and Palestinians three decades ago. But the Holy Land re- 
mains contested by two peoples who cannot bring themselves to 
live together. The fighting in May that left 242 Palestinians and 
ten Israelis dead accomplished nothing except to clear the field 
for the next round of fighting. 

The peace process set up in the Oslo accords in 1993 aims to 
create two states that agree to disagree—using land swaps, secu- 
rity guarantees, a deal to share Jerusalem and a limited “right of 
return” for Palestinians. Israel’s prize was to be a thriving de- 
mocracy and a sanctuary for Jews; for Palestinians it was the pro- 
mise of self-rule. At times, peace has been tantalisingly close, 
only to recede again amid mutual recrimination. 

Today, however, instead of being a pathway to peace, the two- 
State “process” is barring the route. Everyone pretends that 
peace is still on the agenda when, in reality, it is not (see Middle 
East & Africa section). That is a formula for strife. Almost every- 
thing that matters can be deferred with the promise that, one 
day, it will be resolved in a deal that is perpetually over the hori- 
zon. It is also a formula that, by default, leads toa single state. 

The idea that the two-state framework is harmful will not 
come as news to the Palestinians. Under it, the vision ofa viable, 
contiguous, sovereign Palestine has receded. 
Palestinian territory in the West Bank is an ar- 
chipelago in an expanding sea of Israeli settle- 
ments that are illegal under international law. 
Gaza is a solitary island, cut off by an Israeliand 
Egyptian blockade. The Palestinian Authority 
was supposed to be a government in waiting. 
Young Palestinians look on it as the agent of Is- 
rael’s occupation, even as they laud Hamas, the 
violent Islamist group that rules Gaza, for standing up to Israel. 

In place of the stagnant two-state effort, the new Palestinian 
vision is to demand individual rights in one state. Those in Gaza 
and the West Bank resent needing Israel’s permission (often 
withheld) to travel to see their families. The recent fighting was 
fuelled by a dispute over property in East Jerusalem, where most 
Palestinians are mere “residents”. Even Israeli Arabs complain of 
inequality and rose up during the fighting in Gaza. 

That leaves Israel in a quandary. It has thrived under Oslo. 
GDP per head has grown by over half in the past 30 years. Its Iron 
Dome missile-defence system largely shields it from Hamas’s at- 
tacks. A divided, weak Palestinian leadership suits Binyamin 
Netanyahu, the prime minister, who shows little interest in the 
Palestinians. And it’s not just him: the conflict did not feature 
much in any of the four elections Israel has held since 2019. 

This cannot last. The Oslo figleaf lets Israel claim that the oc- 
cupation will be undone in a final deal. As the interim power in 
charge, it has no duty to extend full rights to the West Bank. But 
54 years after the six-day war, the idea of atemporary occupation 
rings increasingly hollow. 

Without hope of an agreement, Israel’s critics have begun to 
talk of a “one-state reality”. This challenges Israel: as the Holy 
Land has as many Jews as Palestinians, it cannot remain both 






ne 


Jewish and democratic while permanently controlling all of that 
territory. Many critics of Israeli policy, including some liberal 
Jews, now compare the Palestinians’ treatment to apartheid. 

The Palestinian demand for rights is resonating abroad, not 
least in the halls of America’s Congress. By allying Israel to the 
Republican Party, Mr Netanyahu has helped make the Palestin- 
ians part of America’s culture wars. Progressives in the Demo- 
cratic Party have started to declare that Palestinian lives matter. 

America is Israel's most important ally. True, American aid 
matters less than it did and Israel now produces most of its own 
advanced weapons. It has relations with more countries, includ- 
ing its Arab neighbours through the Abraham accords. Yet if it 
drifts away from Europe and America and towards countries like 
Russia, China and populist India, it will be a blow to Israel as a 
Western, liberal and democratic ideal. 

More important, Mr Netanyahu’s “anti-solutionism” leaves 
his country less able than ever to navigate a future with the Pal- 
estinians. His embrace of the Jewish far right makes eruptions 
more likely even as it fires up militant Palestinians—witness the 
recent communal violence in Israeli cities. The wall that seals off 
Israel from the West Bank has led to deeper distrust between Ar- 
abs and Jews. The settlements, once thought negotiable, have 
become permanent obstacles to peace. 

The status quo has served Israel well but is 
not sustainable. Sooner or later there will be a 
reckoning that requires a new formula for liv- 
ing next to the Palestinians. Adhering to Oslo 
while undermining it in practice feeds the reali- 
ty of one state—because it makes two states 
harder to realise. 

Instead of imposing peace in one top-down 
stroke of diplomatic brilliance, a more realistic 
aim would be to build it patiently from the bottom up. The guid- 
ing principle should be to focus on the human and civil rights of 
Palestinians. Israel will not grant Palestinians full rights tomor- 
row. But it can make its Arab citizens more equal by devoting re- 
sources to their communities. It could make the administration 
of Jerusalem more inclusive, so that tiffs over fencing do not es- 
calate into war. It must take more responsibility for the suffering 
in the West Bank and Gaza—and work harder to alleviate it. 

A focus on rights also makes Palestinian leaders more ac- 
countable. They cannot easily demand rights from Israel that 
they deny their own people. Mahmoud Abbas is in the 17th year 
of a four-year term as president. His Fatah party is sclerotic. Ha- 
mas tramples the rights of its people, including women and mi- 
norities. Better Palestinian leaders are a prerequisite for peace. 

Abandoning Oslo carries risks, obviously. Unbound, Israeli 
settlers might push farther into Palestinian territory. Hamas, 
which wants a single state in which Palestinians would out- 
weigh Jews, might redouble its resistance. But today’s path is 
even riskier. 

Peace always starts by acknowledging reality. It takes root by 
improving lives and renewing politics. That can flourish into 
something new. Then, one day, the parties can start talking 
again about a deal, whether of one state or two. m 





Leaders 11 


12 


Leaders 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Corporate investment 


Innovation nations 


Firms are rediscovering their love for investment 


S THE RICH world reopens, the contours of the post-pan- 

demic economy are becoming clear. The latest trend is a glo- 
bal surge in capital spending (see Finance section). Forecasters 
reckon that overall real investment worldwide will soon be a 
fifth higher than it was before the pandemic. America’s business 
investment is rising at an annual rate of 15%. By 2022 companies 
in the S&P 500 are forecast to be spending over a tenth more on 
factories, technology, R&D and the like. Barely a day goes by 
without a large firm boasting about how much it plans to 
splurge. AT&T says it will throw $24bn a year at its networks. 
Sony is piling $18bn into an expansion push. Semiconductor 
firms are engaged in one of the biggest capital- 
Spending (or capex) sprees in history. 

That is both a sharp change and an enor- 
mously significant one. Sharp, because before 
covid-i9 managers embraced capex austerity. 
America’s business investment had stagnated 
relative to GDP for several decades. Britain’s was 
15% lower than in the late 1990s. Even as busi- 
ness profits soared, firms devoted a smaller 
Share of their cashflows to capex and R&D, and more to share 
buybacks and dividends. Significant, because investment in 
new technologies and business practices is the secret sauce be- 
hind higher living standards. Weak capital spending contribut- 
ed to the rich world’s sluggish productivity and growth in the 
2010S, and to the gnawing sense that capitalism was misfiring. 

Now, though, all that is changing. Fiscal stimulus has put 
money in people's pockets. In America real disposable income 
per person is 27% higher than it was in February 2020. And as 
economies reopen, people are in the mood to spend. Companies 
can thus be more confident there will be demand for their wares 


$trn 
Capex 


Ae we Oe 


M@ R&D 


S&P 500 investment 





20 


in the next few years—as good an incentive as any to expand ca- 
pacity. Some firms, especially in consumer-facing industries, 
are low on inventory and are frantically trying to catch up. 

Yet capital spending is rising not just because the economic 
cycle is on the up. Firms are also adjusting to permanent pan- 
demic-induced shifts, from an emerging norm of “hybrid work” 
to greater online shopping. The big tech firms, whose products 
are so important to this shift, have led the investment charge. In 
2020 they accounted for a third of total R&D spending in the S&P 
500; this year they are boosting capex by 30% relative to 2019. 

Other companies now recognise that they need to pull up 
their socks. High-street retailers are at last in- 
vesting heavily in online offerings to compete 
with Amazon. Restaurants continue to improve 
their dine-at-home service even as dine-in 
reopens, allowing them to squeeze more sales 
out of preparing food. Consultancies are find- 
ing ways to let their staff remain connected 
when they are not in the office. Growth in global 
shipments of computers for companies will be 
even faster this year than last. All this promises a world in which 
people get more done in less time. 

Firms in some industries still play by the rules of the 2010s. 
Mining companies seem cautious about shelling out in order to 
relieve supply bottlenecks in commodity markets. Big hotel 
chains appear to have no plans to install rainforest showers in 
every room. And it remains to be seen whether the post-pan- 
demic norm will be one of structurally higher investment 
spending, or whether firms slip back into their old ways. For 
now, though, stand back and appreciate the global capex surge. 
It promises a more dynamic form of capitalism. @ 


FORECAST 


ZA Ay 


The euro zone 


Take one for the team 


To avoid a two-speed Europe, Germany must learn to live with a little inflation 


NFLATION IN GERMANY exceeded 2% in April. If the Bundes- 
bank’s latest forecasts prove right, it could soon reach 4% for 
the first time in nearly 30 years. Inflation angst is rising among 
the country’s monetary hawks. The exigencies of the pandemic 
muted German grumbling about the European Central Bank’s ul- 
tra-loose monetary policy. But as inflation rises, so will reflexive 
German demands that the bank should taper its bond-buying. 
Such clamouring would be misguided. Europe's recovery is 
more subdued than America’s, making the odds even better that 
the inflation spike will prove temporary. And the interests of the 
weaker members of the currency union, still crawling their way 
back to health, should come first. 
The hyperinflation of the 1920s etched inflation-phobia deep 
into the German psyche. After the second world war the Bundes- 
bank earned a fearsome reputation by being the first to tame the 


inflationary beast. In the early 2000s, shortly after the birth of 
the euro, Germany restrained wage costs and the southern Euro- 
pean economies lost competitiveness against it. As the south- 
erners recovered from their debt crises, they narrowed the gap 
by clamping down on their own labour costs, while Germany did 
too little to adjust. That set the euro zone on ademand-deficient, 
deflationary path. The area’s economy has never fully recovered, 
even as the ECB has used up most of its ammunition. 

That lost decade is one reason why spiralling wages and pric- 
es in Europe are vanishingly unlikely, even as overheating is a 
possibility in America. What is more, the hit from the pandemic 
in Europe has been worse. Output in the euro zone fell further 
than in America last year. Despite this, its fiscal stimulus looks 
stingy compared with the Biden administration’s largesse. The 
EU's new €750bn ($919bn) recovery fund will take years to be dis- >» 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


» bursed fully. Investors expect inflation in five years’ time to lan- 
guish below the EcB’s target of “close to, but below 2%”. Expecta- 
tions in America, by contrast, are above 2%. 

Further reassurance can be gained from peering into the me- 
chanics of Germany’s inflation spike. As in America, it reflects 
some transitory global factors, including the oil-price collapse 
last spring which depressed the base used to calculate the annu- 
al rate. Strip out food and energy prices, and inflation in Ger- 
many was only about 1% in April. Some temporary country-spe- 
cific issues are also in play. A carbon charge has pushed up pric- 
es, and an emergency cut to value-added taxes last year will ar- 
ithmetically boost inflation later this year. Look along the 
supply chain and you might take fright at Germany’s producer- 
price inflation, of more than 5% in April. But this should ease as 
factories and suppliers respond to a surge in orders. 

Perhaps the biggest reason why Germany should tolerate a 
period of above-target inflation is that the euro area’s health de- 
pends on it. Activity is resuming across the zone, as vaccines are 
administered and lockdown restrictions lifted (see Finance sec- 
tion). Germany has less lost ground to make up than most. It suf- 


Leaders 


fered a deep downturn last year, with the economy shrinking by 
5%, but it fared far better than France, Italy and Spain, where 
output fell by nearly twice as much. Unemployment in Germany 
remains low, at 4.5%. Its reliance on manufacturing and exports 
has been a boon. Other countries, by contrast, must pray that 
spending on tourism, retail and hospitality returns to the levels 
of the old days. Goldman Sachs, a bank, reckons that Spain and 
Italy have twice as much economic slack as Germany. 

The EcB sets monetary policy for the currency union as a 
whole, not its largest member alone. And so Germany must seek 
to keep its economy humming along while the others catch up 
and the stimulus is withdrawn. That is the price of being one of 
the strongest members of a currency union. After a lost decade, 
the euro zone has learned from some of the mistakes of the past 
crisis. The pursuit of balanced budgets and austerity has been 
abandoned for the time being. The Eu is on the verge of issuing 
common debt to finance its recovery fund. Both shifts were pos- 
sible because of a change of thinking in Berlin. A recognition 
that the German economy must run hot is the missing link in re- 
storing confidence throughout the euro zone. & 


Ventilation 


Fresh thinking about fresh air 


It is time to clean up the air in buildings 


N 1842 EDWIN CHADWICK, a British social reformer, published 

his “Report on the Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Popu- 
lation”. By documenting evidence of social and geographic in- 
equalities in health, Chadwick showed that poor sanitation was 
associated with poor health. The report eventually led British 
cities to organise clean water supplies and to centralise their 
Sewage systems, in turn reducing the prevalence of infectious 
diseases, in particular cholera. Similar reforms around the 
world in the 20th century tackled food safety and outdoor-air 
pollution. Now a new public-health priority is becoming appar- 
ent: making indoor air cleaner. 

Take schools. They are “chronically under-ventilated”, ac- 
cording to the Lancet covid-19 commission. A 
study of 100 American classrooms found 87 
with worryingly low ventilation rates. Across 
Denmark, France, Italy, Norway and Sweden, 
researchers found that indoor-air quality in 
66% of classrooms fell short of healthy stan- 
dards. In America nearly one child in 13 has 
asthma—a condition triggered by allergens of- 
ten found in schools. Outdoor-air pollution can 
penetrate inside buildings—childhood exposure can affect neu- 
rodevelopment and academic performance, and cause cancer. 

The problem extends well beyond classrooms. Many people 
spend more than 90% of their time indoors. Researchers have 
linked under-ventilated spaces in buildings to a range of ail- 
ments—headaches, fatigue, shortness of breath, coughs, dizzi- 
ness, nausea, and irritation of eye, nose, throat and skin. Poor 
ventilation has been blamed for increased absences from work, 
decreased productivity and asthma. 

The pandemic has brought a new urgency to the matter. The 
virus which causes covid-19 spreads between people less by 
close contact and infected surfaces and more by hitching a ride 





on aerosol particles from people's lungs that can linger in the air 
of an ill-ventilated room (see Science section). 

Indoor-air quality has attracted little government attention. 
But achieving clean, pathogen-free air in buildings and indoor 
public spaces is possible. The first step is to give people more in- 
formation on how well-ventilated their air is. Carbon-dioxide 
concentrations are a good proxy for ventilation, and cheap sen- 
sors to detect this gas in rooms could provide occupants with 
useful data on when to open windows or upgrade their air-con- 
ditioning systems. National indoor-air-quality standards would 
help. One way to enforce them could be through ventilation cer- 
tificates for buildings, similar to food-hygiene certificates that 
already exist for restaurants. 

The bill for all this need not be huge. A recent 
study found that raising the standard of ventila- 
tion in all American elementary and secondary 
schools to the minimum level would cost less 
than 0.1% of the country’s typical public spend- 
ing on education. President Joe Biden’s Ameri- 
can Rescue Plan assigns $123bn to improving 
school infrastructure and mentions ventilation 
as a priority. Other countries should follow suit. 

More investment would be money well spent. Better indoor 
air boosts academic performance—maths and reading scores go 
up, and pupils are measurably more attentive in class. Office- 
workers benefit, too. Researchers have found the cognitive 
scores of people in well-ventilated offices are 61% higher than 
those of workers in conventional office set-ups. 

Ventilation is the forgotten part of the agenda for improved 
public health. Chadwick's report on sanitation lifted people's ex- 
pectation that the water coming out of their taps would be clean. 
Covid-19 should lead policymakers to ensure, belatedly, that the 
Same is true for the air in people’s buildings. m 


13 


14 Leaders 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Mexico 


The false messiah 


Andrés Manuel Lopez Obrador pursues ruinous policies by improper means 


N A WORLD plagued by authoritarian populists, Mexico’s presi- 

dent has somehow escaped the limelight. Liberals furiously 
condemn the erosion of democratic norms under Hungary's Vik- 
tor Orban, India’s Narendra Modi and Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro, but 
barely notice Andrés Manuel Lopez Obrador. This is partly be- 
cause he lacks some of the vices of his populist peers. He does 
not deride gay people, bash Muslims or spur his supporters to 
torch the Amazon. To his credit, he speaks out loudly and often 
for Mexico’s have-nots, and he is not personally corrupt. None- 
theless, he is a danger to Mexican democracy. 

Mr Lopez Obrador divides Mexicans into two groups: “the 
people’, by which he means those who support him; and the 
elite, whom he denounces, often by name, as crooks and traitors 
who are to blame for all Mexico’s problems. He says he is build- 
ing a more authentic democracy. It is an odd creature. He calls a 
lot of votes, but not always on topics that are best resolved by 
voting. For example, when legal objections are raised to one of 
his pet projects—moving an airport, building a pipeline, block- 
ing a factory—he calls a referendum. He picks a small electorate 
that he knows will side with him. When it does, he declares that 
the people have spoken. He has even called for a national refer- 
endum on whether to prosecute five of the six living ex-presi- 
dents of Mexico for corruption. As a stunt to remind voters of the 
shortcomings of previous regimes, it is inge- 
nious. Itis alsoa mockery of the rule of law. 

The president’s scorn for rules is one reason 
the elections on June 6th matter (see Briefing). 
He is not on the ballot; his single six-year term 
expires in 2024. But the national legislature is 
up for grabs, as are 15 of 32 governorships, most 
state assemblies and thousands of local posts. 

Voters have a chance to rein in their presi- 
dent by rejecting his party, Morena. It is not clear that they will. 
Most are dissatisfied with the way the country is being run, but 
61% approve of Mr Lopez Obrador himself. Many feel that he 
cares about ordinary people, even if he has not materially im- 
proved their lives. The opposition parties have failed to offer a 
coherent alternative. Morena is slipping in the polls, but may re- 
tain its majority in the lower house, with the help of its allies. 
The more levers he controls, the further Mr Lopez Obrador can 
pursue his plan to transform Mexico. 

He has done good things, such as bumping up pensions and 
subsidising apprenticeships for the young. Though a leftist, he 
has kept spending and debt under control, so Mexico’s credit rat- 
ing remains tolerably firm. But he suffers from what Moisés 
Naim, a Venezuelan journalist, calls “ideological necrophil- 
ia”—a love of ideas that have been tried and proved not to work. 

He has fond memories of the 1970s, when a government- 
owned oil monopoly spread largesse around his home state. He 
is trying to recreate something similar, by all but banning priv- 
ate investment in hydrocarbons and forcing the grid to buy pow- 
er from state sources first, no matter how costly and filthy they 
are. He likes railways, so he is ploughing $7bn into a diesel- 
burning boondoggle in his home region. Frustrated with offi- 
cials who fuss about rules and putting contracts out to tender, he 





enlists the army to build his railway, run ports and fight crime. 
In other countries, inviting the men with guns to handle huge 
sums of public money with scant supervision has proved cata- 
strophic, as any Egyptian or Pakistani could warn him. But Mr 
Lopez Obrador is notorious for not listening to advice. His catch- 
phrase in cabinet meetings is “Callate!” (Shut up). 

His disdain for expertise has made government less compe- 
tent. His tree-planting scheme has encouraged farmers to chop 
down old trees so as to be paid to plant new ones. His policy of 
“hugs, not bullets” for gangsters has failed to reduce a strato- 
spheric murder rate. For all his railing against graft, Mexicans re- 
port as many demands for bribes from officials as before. 

He was woefully slow to respond to covid-19 and spent far too 
little on cushioning its economic effects. According to The Econ- 
omist’s estimates, Mexico has suffered 477,000 excess deaths 
from the pandemic, one of the worst rates in the world; and its 
GDP shrank by 8.5% last year. The country should be poised for 
galloping growth. Multinationals are eager to diversify their 
Supply chains away from China, and Mexico is a manufacturing 
hub next to the United States, which is entering a stimulus- 
stoked post-covid boom. Yet investors are wary. 

They fear the uncertainty of rule by presidential whimsy. Mr 
Lopez Obrador is undermining checks on his power. He leans on 
advertisers not to support fault-finding media. 
He cuts the budgets of watchdogs, or stuffs 
them with his supporters. Last week he said he 
would replace the central-bank governor with 
someone who favours “a moral economy’. He 
has threatened the body that runs elections. 

The next three years will determine the 
depth and duration of the damage he does to 
Mexico and its democracy. He is barred from 
seeking re-election, but is trying illegally to extend the term ofa 
friendly supreme-court judge. Critics fear he wants to set a pre- 
cedent for himself. Mexico’s institutions are strong, but may 
buckle under sustained assault by a zealot with popular support. 
The country escaped de facto one-party rule in 2000. Given the 
risk, voters on June 6th should support whichever opposition 
party is best placed to win, wherever they live. The opposition 
parties should work together to restrain the president. 


Learn from your mistakes 

They should learn from him, too. He is popular partly because 
they did a poor job of helping those left behind during the long 
boom that followed economic liberalisation in the 1980s; and al- 
so because much of the ruling class really is corrupt. Mr Lopez 
Obrador’s ad hoc, lawless approach has not made Mexico clean- 
er, but he has highlighted the need for a clean-up. 

The United States needs to pay attention. Donald Trump did 
not care about Mexican democracy. President Joe Biden should 
make clear that he does. He must be tactful: Mexicans are under- 
standably allergic to being pushed around by their big neigh- 
bour. But America ought not to turn a blind eye to creeping au- 
thoritarianism in its backyard. As well as sending vaccines, un- 
conditionally, Mr Biden should send quiet warnings. m 


Executive focus 15 





Unique Access to Confidential Opportunities 


InterExec is the global leader in enabling lop Executives | . -_ 
to access $200k to $2m+ unadvertised vacancies worldwide. 1c z l , < ( ) 


We act discreetly through a 15,000 strong international network. UNIQUE NETWORK @ OUTSTANDING TALENT 


london@interexec.net www.interexec.net +44(0)20 7256 5085 


OPEN SOCIETY 
FOUNDATIONS 


The Open Society Foundations works to build vibrant and inclusive 
democracies whose governments are accountable and open to the participation 
of all people, and is the worid's largest private Tunder of independent groups 
working for justice, democratic governance, and human rights 


DIRECTOR - CLIMATE JUSTICE 


You'll act as the principal strategist for Open Society Foundations’ engagement 
on climate change and environmental justice issues globally. 


CHIEF STRATEGY OFFICER 


You will lead on applying an institution-wide lens to the design, implementation, 
monitoring and assessment of strategic plans and initiatives across the Open 
Society Foundations (USF) network. 
At OSF, you'll enjoy top-notch benefits including generous time off, flexible 
working, health insurance, generous retirement savings plan, progressive 
paid parental leave, reproductive and family planning support, sabbatical 
opportunities, and much more 
To find out more, visit www.opensocietyfoundations.org > 
Employment. 
Closing date: 6 June 2021. 

‘@te)s:1- 8 slate’ | , me . We aim to build an inclusive workforce that is reflective of the populations 


we support, and actively seek applications from those who are marginalised 
and underrepresented, 






——— ee ee 


1 Executive focus 


AFREAIMBANK 


Current 
\VF- Tors lated (21> 








7 


= 


ar 


CA GL&§ BAL 


BANKING, INSURANCE, LEGAL & FINANCE 









The African Export-Import Bank (Afreximbank) is a pan-African multilateral financial institution 
established in 1993, for the purpose of financing and promoting intra and extra African trade. 
“The Bank” is currently hiring the below positions. All positions are based at “The Bank’s” 
Headquarters (HQ) in Cairo, Egypt unless otherwise stated on the job description. To view further 
information, please visit their website: www.afreximbank.com 





Senior Manager, ACMA (Capital Markets) 
To apply, contact Shearidan at SRABSCH @ CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Assistant Manager, ACMA (Advisory) 
To apply, contact Shearidan at SRABSCH @ CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Assistant Manager, ACMA (Capital Markets) 
To apply, contact Shearidan at SRABSCH @ CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, Trade Information (Trade Portal) 
To apply, contact Robin at ROBOTHA @CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Assistant Manager, Trade Information (Consulting Practice) 
To apply, contact Robin at ROBOTHA @CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, AU/ AfCFTA Relations & Trade Policy (Trade Policy & Market Access) 
To apply, contact Scott at SFRASER @ CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Assistant Manager, AU/AfCFTA Relations & Trade Policy 
To apply, contact Scott at SFRASER @CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, IATI (Trade Facilitation - Transit & Customs) 
To apply, contact Robin at ROBOTHA @CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, IATI (IATF & Exhibitions - Trade & Investment Promotions) 
To apply, contact Lise at LKOTZE@CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, IATI (IATF & Exhibitions - Portfolio Management) 
To apply, contact Lise at LKOTZE@CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Senior Manager, HR (Organisational Effectiveness) 
To apply, contact Clifford at CNDLEBE @ CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, Administration (Business Continuity Mgt) 
To apply, contact Fabio at FDASILVAFARIA @ CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Senior Manager, Client Relations (HQ) 
To apply, contact Robin at ROBOTHA @CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Assistant Manager Cyber & Cloud Security (Information Security and Risk) 
To apply, contact Fabio at FDASILVAFARIA @ CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, Guarantees & Specialised Finance (Guarantees) 
To apply, contact Robin at ROBOTHA @ CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, Credit Quality Assurance (Eastern & Southern Africa) 
To apply, contact Robin at ROBOTHA @CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, Client Relations (Southern Africa) 
To apply, contact Robin at ROBOTHA @CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, Client Relations (Anglophone West Africa) 
To apply, contact Robin at ROBOTHA @ CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, PRPU (Project Preparation Unit - Francophone) 
To apply, contact Lise at LKOTZE@CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, Treasury & Markets (Treasury Client Solutions) 
To apply, contact Lise at LKOTZE@CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, Treasury & Markets (Credit Rating, Process Mgt & Balance Sheet Analytics) 
To apply, contact Lise at LKOTZE @CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, Treasury & Markets (Planning, Analytics, Performance Mgt & Reporting) 
To apply, contact Lise at LKOTZE@CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Manager, Treasury & Markets (PAPSS Settlement) 
To apply, contact Lise at LKOTZE@CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Assistant Manager, INTE (Application Support — Core Banking) 
To apply, contact Fabio at FDASILVAFARIA @ CAGLOBALINT.COM 


Regional Chief Operating Officer, North Africa 
To apply, contact Lise at LKOTZE@CAGLOBALINT.COM 


CA Global has been retained to search and select the final shortlists for these positions. To apply, 
please visit our website https://www.caglobalint.com/jobs or for more information contact Bryan 
Le Roux, Director at CA Global Headhunters on +27 (0) 216599200. All closing dates have been 
outlined on the job descriptions. 


WHAT IS 
AVAXHOME ? 











the biggest Internet portal, 
providing you various content: 
Me brand new books, trending movies, 
fresh magazines, hot games, 


recent software, latest music releases. 


OF alivaauhacxemcy-haicyi-kernfelamelal=mleh)\a elala= 
Cheap constant access to piping hot media 
Protect your downloadings from Big brother 

Safer, than torrent-trackers 


18 years of seamless operation and our users: satisfaction 


All languages 
Brand new content 
One site 








AVALI 


AvaxHome - Your End Place 





- t. 
*. 
Fa es 
: ie “—* 
: . - 
3 e*, 
Ak . , 
7 uy B, < 
~ : 
. , 
. » > 
ot cs 
; 
my. + Se 
¥ 
7 
i ; 
, 
Xe CO SST Eee 
& 
ait 
> * 


We have everything for all of your needs. Just open https://avxlive.icu 





Letters 


E-taxes 

Mike Godwin’'s law of Nazi 
analogies states that as an 
online discussion grows 
longer, the probability ofa 
comparison involving Nazis or 
Hitler approaches one. A corol- 
lary adage might be that as an 
economic discussion grows 
longer, the probability of creat- 
ing a new form of taxation 
approaches one. Your leader 
on the rise of e-money violated 
this proper economic dis- 
cussion by creating no new tax 
(“The digital currencies that 
matter’, May 8th). In fact, tax 
got no mention at all. 

You summed up well the 
positive aspects of central- 
bank digital currencies 
(CBDCs). Yet government- 
issued fiat currencies are 
deeply entwined with tax (fiat 
currencies are arguably just tax 
credits). CBDCs provide new 
tax-collection powers. Com- 
plex taxation algorithms can 
be applied to any CBDC trans- 
action in real time. Once peo- 
ple realise the power of CBDC 
systems to support various 
taxation initiatives at low 
transaction costs, we should 
expect avalanches of propos- 
als: town taxes, child-noise 
taxes, sugar taxes, alcohol- 
consumption taxes, foreign- 
visitor taxes, and soon. 

In 2016 I gave an example of 
such a CBDC-based tax to the 
House of Lords. Given wide- 
spread sentiment that London 
is too Overweening, imagine a 
populist redistribution tax 
whereby transaction taxes rise 
in wealthy districts. To bring 
about levelling up, politicians 
increase the taxation rate as 
you approach Trafalgar Square, 
up to 99.9% beside Nelson’s 
Column, or spend your money 
in the Outer Hebrides at 0.1% 
tax. Technology cuts two ways. 
PROFESSOR MICHAEL MAINELLI 
Executive chairman 
Z/Yen Group 
London 


Some countries, such as Aus- 
tralia, have already digitalised 
their currency independently 
of their central bank. Since 
2013 most Australians have 
opened cost-free myGov ac- 
counts that can be operated 


from their mobile phones. The 
government also issues cost- 
free debit cards linked to their 
myGov to make payments. Asa 
result many people on welfare 
no longer need a bank account. 
SHANN TURNBULL 

Principal 

International Institute for 
Self-governance 

Sydney 


How wotrying to read your 
article on govcoins in the same 
week that an important oil 
pipeline was shut by a cyber- 
attack. One cannot even 
fathom the effect of such an 
attack on a digital currency 
issued by acentral bank, an 
event that would immediately 
freeze all financial activity, 
from corporate transactions to 
buying groceries. 

PETER PRASTHOFER 

The Woodlands, Texas 


Your special report on banking 
mentioned whaling “sloops” 
that sailed out of Nantucket 
(May 8th). A sloop is a vessel 
designed for speed. Whaling 
vessels of the 1800s, especially 
from Nantucket, were more 
likely to be brigs, brigantines, 
or ship-rigged with multiple 
masts and wide hulls to hold 
supplies and whale oil fora 
three- or four-year voyage. 
Only the Native American 
tribes of the Pacific north-west 
or Alaska would venture out in 
a narrow hull to go whaling, 
which those “coarse” sailors 
from New England would 
think to be foolhardy. 
GREGORY SANIAL 

Grand Rapids, Michigan 


Technology and China 

You reported on the important 
role of the American govern- 
ment’s Bureau of Industry and 
Security in writing the rules on 
trade in technology with China 
(“Assuming the position”, May 
8th). Itis misguided, however, 
to suggest that the appoint- 
ment of an “outsider” to lead 
the BIs would indicate a lack of 
a “real plan” on China. The 
agency is responsible for 
ensuring that sensitive tech- 
nologies do not reach ad- 
versaries that would use them 


| for harm. That is an increas- 


ingly challenging job, especial- 
ly as China has blurred the line 
between the private sector, 
government and the army. 

The Trump administration 
added some 330 Chinese gov- 
ernment-aligned companies to 
the Entity List. The Biden 
administration has added 
another seven to that blacklist, 
signalling a continuation of 
the policy against the Chinese 
Communist Party’s military- 
civil fusion strategy. The true 
test of whether this adminis- 
tration has a “real plan” on 
China will be whether Joe 
Biden’s nominee understands 
its ambitions to steal and 
exploit American-made tech- 
nology and is willing to put the 
United States’ long-term 
national-security interests 
ahead of short-term corporate 
profits. It is not relevant 
whether the nominee has a 
legal credential, is an outsider, 
or is a Washington veteran. 

The appointment should be 
made on substance, capability 
and an understanding of the 
issues and the stakes—not 
whether an individual fits the 
mould of a bureaucrat. 

ROSLYN LAYTON 
Co-founder 

China Tech Threat 
Naples, Florida 


Jackson, Wyoming 
Lexington’s column (May 15th) 
on Liz Cheney’s political de- 
mise was excellent, and I share 
Ms Cheney’s concerns about 
Donald Trump’s detrimental 
impact on democracy. How- 
ever, aS a proud Wyomingite, I 
still resent Ms Cheney for 
committing one cardinal sin 
against the people of Wyo- 
ming: she moved to Jackson. 
You have to understand 
Wyoming's small-scale geo- 
politics to understand this. As 
a former governor Said, the 
State is just one small town 
with long streets between 
neighbours. Most of it is rural, 
desolate and windy. Small 
communities rely on drilling, 
mining and ranching to sur- 
vive. We are interconnected at 
the State Fair, county rodeos 
and high-school sporting 
events. We all know someone 
from Cheyenne, Cody, Gillette, 


The Economist May 29th 2021 17 


Laramie and Sheridan, as well 
as the even smaller towns in 
between. 

The one exception is 
Jackson. Jackson is a beautiful, 
expensive playground for the 
coastal elite. Jackson is insular. 
Jackson does not interact with 
the economy in the rest of the 
State. Most Wyomingites don't 
identify with Jackson. Its 
elitism is foreign to us. We 
spend our vacations in the 
Wind River and Big Horn 
mountain ranges. 

I still question why Ms 
Cheney decided to move there. 
When she was elected to Con- 
gress She was characterised as 
a carpetbagger. Yet, in the 
words of my father, you could 
be born in Jackson and still be 
a Carpetbagger. She could have 
moved to Cody or Sheridan. 

Ianticipate that Ms 
Cheney's popularity will keep 
declining in Wyoming; she 
will continue to be portrayed 
as an east-coast elitist who is 
out of touch with the state. I 
laud her courage in opposing 
Trumpism. I still can't forgive 
her for moving to Jackson. 
JASON DESPAIN 
Casper, Wyoming 


Slapshot 

The casual reference to “Amer- 
ica’s National Hockey League” 
in “The puck stops here” (May 
15th) must have caused your 
Canadian readers to choke on 
their Labatt beer. The NHL was 
founded in Canada and the 
nation referenced in the name 
is Canada. Sadly, however, 
Canadians have long lost 
control of their national sport, 
with 24 of the 31 NHL teams 
located in America. 

Adding insult to injury, 
many of the newer teams are 
located in southern cities such 
as Tampa, Las Vegas or 
Anaheim that rarely, if ever, 
see natural ice. 

ALISTAIR BRYDEN 
Comox, Canada 


Letters are welcome and should be 
addressed to the Editor at 

The Economist, The Adelphi Building, 
1-11 John Adam Street, London wc2Nn 6HT 
Email: letters@economist.com 

More letters are available at: 
Economist.com/letters 


18 











The puritan from Tepetitan 


TEPETITAN 


Few outsiders have noticed how radical Mexico’s president is. Elections on June 
6th will determine how deeply—and ruinously—he can transform his country 


HE PLAQUE beneath a bust of President 

Andrés Manuel Lopez Obrador in his 
home town proclaims him “the face of 
hope” and a “tireless fighter for the rights 
of Mexicans”. That is certainly how the 
people there see him. 

“Andrés Manuel is different,’ says He- 
berto Priego Colomé, a pensioner sitting in 
the shade in Tepetitan, a settlement of 
2,000 souls in Tabasco state in southern 
Mexico. “He’s normal. He’s sincere. He 
talks to the people.” He has also “sent lots 
and lots of help”. The old man gestures toa 
fancy new plaza with a basketball court 
and a diving board from which younger 
folk can plunge into a river. When the pres- 
ident visited, he threw a party on the plaza. 

Mr Priego Colomé ticks off other bene- 
fits Tepetitan’s favourite son has brought: 
bigger public pensions, a training pro- 
gramme for the young, a scheme whereby 
old rural folk are paid to plant trees, anda 
new refinery that will bring jobs to Tabas- 
co. When the river flooded last year, the 
president sent every household in the af- 


fected areas a fridge, a mattress, a stove, a 
fan, some pans and a blender, plus 8,000 
pesos ($400). Some had received 10,000 
pesos after earlier floods. 

Mr Lopez Obrador is not a convention- 
ally skilled orator. He rambles and repeats 
himself. But he connects with Mexico's 
have-nots and makes them feel seen and 
respected. Rarely has a Mexican president 
attracted such adulation—and loathing. To 
his supporters, who are largely rural, hard- 
up or old, he is the first national leader 
since the 1930s who truly cares about them. 
To his detractors, he is an incompetent 
demagogue who could drag Mexico back to 
its pre-democratic past. 

At elections on June 6th Mexicans will 
have a chance to endorse one or other of 
these views. Mr Lopez Obrador is not on 
the ballot—he is not halfway through his 
six-year term. But they will be voting for 
the lower house of the national legislature, 
15 state governorships, 30 out of 32 state as- 
semblies and thousands of local posts such 
as mayor. Voters can either boost Mr Lopez 


| 
é 


_— 


i 
- 
F 1 
of 1 
a ed 
8 
| ' i 
— - I 
« F 4 = 
4 
wa a 
1 4 
+ A 
f 
q | ] 
ie | 
ar 
= 
: 
i] 
| t 
J 
a 
f on im 
Wi 
t 


— 
‘= =9 : 
= ee 
ai i et oe —— = 


——- . 
= 


Sa | 
ya 


Obrador’s party, Morena, or clip its wings. 

Mr Lopez Obrador has attracted far less 
global attention than other populist lead- 
ers. But look closer and he appears aston- 
ishingly similar to them (see table on the 
next page). In his eyes, Mexicans fall into 
two groups: the people, whose authentic 
will he represents, and the elite, who are to 
blame for all Mexico's ills. He sees himself 
as on a historic mission to sweep away the 
rotten habits of the past and establish a re- 
public of virtue. 

If he is on a mission from God, his op- 
ponents must be working for the other 
side, and he lets them know it. Mr Lopez 
Obrador’s predecessor, Enrique Pefia Nie- 
to, is a “spineless, immoral, unpredictable 
sycophant”. Others he has called “appren- 
tice pickpocket” or “reverend thief”. In his 
daily two- to three-hour-long press confer- 
ences, he blasts individuals, such as criti- 
cal journalists. Some have received death 
threats from his supporters. 

He is ostentatiously austere. On assum- 
ing office, he halved the presidential salary 
and put the presidential jet up for sale; he 
flies economy class. The poor applaud 
such gestures. But by cutting his own pay, 
he also cut that of top civil servants; no 
government employee may earn more 
than the head of state. Many of the best- 
qualified quit. “Mexico was building a civil 
service that was professional and serious. 
That’s now broken,’ says Montserrat Rami- 
ro, a former energy regulator. On May 25th} 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


» the United States downgraded its rating of 
the safety of flying over Mexico, citing reg- 
ulatory laxity. A buyer has yet to be found 
for the presidential plane. 

Few would quarrel with Mr Lopez Obra- 
dor’s diagnosis that too much of Mexico's 
political class was corrupt and ignored the 
vast majority of Mexicans. His goals are 
good: to raise incomes, improve public ser- 
vices, cut crime and eliminate corruption. 
But criticisms that he selects the wrong 
policies to achieve them, implements 
them ineptly and tries to nobble any insti- 
tution that gets in his way hit the mark. 


Not his finest hour 

Consider his record on covid-19. The offi- 
cial death toll is 220,000, which is bad 
enough. The Economist's excess-death 
model estimates that as of May 1oth, 
477,000 more Mexicans had died than 
would normally be expected—a rate 68% 
higher than in Brazil, a bungler too. 

The toll is partly down to Mexico's 
crowded cities and overweight population. 
But a panel commissioned by the World 
Health Organisation also found “major de- 
ficiencies in decision-making” by the gov- 
ernment. Mr Lopez Obrador was slow to 
act, set aside too little money and slashed 
research funding. He failed to wear a mask 
in public and said Mexicans could curb the 
spread of the virus by not lying or stealing. 

The infection rate is falling, but the hu- 
man cost has been immense. Gregoria, 
who sells single cigarettes and tamales in 
Mexico City, says two of her brothers died 
of covid-19, aged 52 and 62. She adds that 
the pandemic has driven away her custom- 
ers; the government has given her no help. 

Mr Lopez Obrador has done little to mit- 
igate the economic impact of the pandem- 
ic because he is terrified of debt. A curren- 
cy crisis in 1994 taught him that too much 
debt can cripple the government and let 
foreign creditors boss Mexico around. So 
his fiscal response to covid-19 has been 
among the most parsimonious in Latin 
America. Mexico’s credit rating remains 
tolerably firm. But more than 1m Mexican 
businesses went bust in the past two years. 
The economy shrank by 8.5% last year. 

Even as bars remain open, schools have 
been closed for 14 months (some are re- 
opening as teachers get jabbed). Teachers’ 
unions have strained to keep them shut. 
They are very powerful: in one state, Oaxa- 
ca,a union controls the distribution of fed- 
eral funds to the state government. Mr Pe- 
hla Nieto tried to curb the unions’ power. 
Mr Lopez Obrador has restored it. 

The president’s policies are an eclectic 
mix of statism, nationalism and nostalgia 
for the 1970s. Take energy. Back in the 
1970S, oil prices were high and Mexico's 
State oil monopoly was a mainstay of the 
economy, especially in Mr Lopez Obrador’s 
home state. Like a boutique that stocks 






=z 
Slipping a little 
Mexico, chamber of deputies, seats 
2021 

RULING PARTY AND ALLIES 
Current Morena 
Projected* 


0 100 
Sources: National Electoral Institute; SIMO Consulting/E/ Pais 


200 


bell-bottoms, he is trying to revive a ques- 
tionable old fashion. He has all but banned 
foreign investment in Mexican oil and is 
pouring cash into an $8bn refinery in Ta- 
basco, to be run by Pemex, the mega-loss- 
making national oil firm. 

Mr Lopez Obrador has ordered CFE, the 
State electricity provider, to buy state-gen- 
erated power first, rather than the cheapest 
option. This is often from dirty oil—so 
high in sulphur that its use is banned in 
most ships. Cheaper, cleaner options exist, 
but these are usually produced by private 
and often foreign firms, which Mr Lopez 
Obrador distrusts. His policies have raised 
questions about $26bn of private invest- 
ments already made in solar and wind en- 
ergy in Mexico. This deters investors. 

Fed up with bureaucratic delays, Mr Lo- 
pez Obrador has turned to the army, which 
follows orders promptly. It now watches 
the border, runs ports, helps catch crimi- 
nals, distributes textbooks and vaccines, 
and is building 2,700 branches of “the Bank 
of Wellbeing”, a state-run bank to disburse 
cash to the needy. Men in uniform are also 
building a hopelessly uneconomic $7bn 
railway loop around his home state, paid 
for by the taxpayer. On completion the ar- 
my will own it and pocket the income. For 
now the army is relatively clean—and re- 
spected. That may change if its leaders are 
tempted by the vast sums of money they 
suddenly control. 

Mr Lopez Obrador’s crusade against cor- 
ruption has been selective. He has im- 


ay 
The populists’ checklist 
Traits of selected heads of government 


Andrés Manuel 


Majority 


Briefing Mexico's populist president 


Independent 


300 


400 500 


*For June 6th election 


posed tougher punishments for bribe-tak- 
ing Officials and clamped down on firms 
that sell facturas (bills that can be used for 
tax deductions). However, fewer govern- 
ment contracts are put out to tender than 
in the past. Mexicans tell pollsters they are 
asked to pay bribes as much as before. 

The president’s vow to curb violence 
has proved hollow, too. The murder rate, 
five times that of the United States, has 
barely budged. Gangs control huge 
swathes of territory, corrupt the police and 
pull the strings of local mayors. 


Could try harder 

Itis not Mr Lopez Obrador’s fault that drugs 
are illegal in the United States, nor that this 
generates vast profits for Mexican crimi- 
nals. Nonetheless, his efforts to stem the 
mayhem have been limp. He blames pover- 
ty for crime, and promises to create more 
jobs for the young. But at the same time he 
has replaced the federal police with a more 
militarised outfit, the National Guard, un- 
der command of the army. 

Under the slogan of “hugs, not bullets’, 
he has taken a soft approach to gangs. In 
2019 he freed a drug kingpin’s son, hoping 
to buy a respite from the killing. He did not 
get one. The implied message to the gangs 
has been “You can do what you like and we 
won't ask for anything in return,’ says 
Jorge Castaneda, an ex-foreign minister. 

For many, Mr Lopez Obrador’s gravest 
flaw is disregard for the rule of law. He can- 


19 


celled a half-built new airport for Mexico >> 


LopezObrador JairBolsonaro § NarendraModi ViktorOrban Donald Trump 
Mexico, 2018- Brazil, 2019- India, 2014- Hungary, 2010- US, 2017-21 
Claims to represent | 
will of the people 9 9 9 9 9 
Insults opponents 
in colourful ways 9 o o 9 
Sows hatred of ethnic/ se 
religious minorities ~ a o 9 o 
Undermines institutions © © © © © 
Fails to respect law g ww) g gY 
Ignores science © i) g X © 


Source: The Economist 


20 Briefing Mexico's populist president 


» City. After the decision was challenged in 
court, he called an unlawful referendum, 
in which a tiny electorate gave him a green 
light. Claiming that the people had spoken, 
he pressed ahead. 

This has become a habit. He used a sim- 
ilar plebiscite to “approve” a gas pipeline, 
and another to halt construction of an 
American-owned brewery. Such shenani- 
gans appal business folk. “We have lost cer- 
tainty for investment, and for the future of 
Mexico as a democracy,’ says one. Foreign 
direct investment (FDI) should be boom- 
ing, as firms scramble to diversify their 
supply chains away from China. Mexico 
has a sophisticated industrial base and the 
world’s biggest national market on its 
doorstep, where demand for manufac- 
tured goods has been strong in the past 
year and which is starting a post-lockdown 
boom. Yet FDI has fallen under Mr Lopez 
Obrador. A rise in the first quarter of this 
year included few new projects. “Firms are 
investing only to maintain existing pro- 
jects,’ says Luis Rubio, an economist. 


A bad way to run things 

Mr Lopez Obrador is trying to inject the 
“people's will” into criminal justice, too, 
proposing a referendum on whether to 
prosecute five of his predecessors for cor- 
ruption. He has also pressed an indepen- 
dent-minded judge to resign and signed a 
law extending the term of the friendly 
chief justice of the Supreme Court. The 
court will rule as to whether this is legal— 
which it plainly is not. Mr Lopez Obrador’s 
critics fear he is trying to set a precedent. 
For a Mexican president to stand for a sec- 
ond term is taboo. But what if he were 
merely to extend his first term, perhaps 
claiming that the people demanded it? 

Mr Lopez Obrador assails institutions 
as eagerly as children thwacking a pinata. 
He stifles the media by leaning on busi- 
nesses not to advertise in critical outlets. 
He cuts the budgets of recalcitrant agen- 
cies. He wants to abolish INAI, the transpa- 
rency agency, arguing that such a body is 
unnecessary when the president is an hon- 
est fellow like himself. He has threatened 
the institute that oversees elections, too. 
Critics fear he will do away with it and have 
elections run by the presidential office. 

His social programmes have done some 
good. His pensions rises and the minimum 
wage have helped many. His schemes to 
Support young and rural people are well- 
meaning. Some 330,000 Mexicans aged 18- 
29 get 4,310 pesos a month through year- 
long apprenticeships. Over 420,000 old ru- 
ral folk are paid to plant trees. 

Yet both programmes are badly de- 
signed. Some farmers chop down trees so 
they can be paid to plant more. Some plant 
species that wilt in the local soil. The youth 
programme is chaotic. No one checks if the 
young people receiving cash are actually 


learning anything. Some employers de- 
mand kickbacks. The handouts are por- 
trayed as personal gifts from the president. 

His economic record is dismal. Some 
economists predict real GDP per person 
will be lower at the end of his term than at 
the beginning. Mexico should be doing far 
better. Joe Biden’s stimulus should turbo- 
charge Mexican exports, even as Mexican 
emigrants send chunks of their stimulus 
payments back home. The country’s eco- 
nomic sluggishness is the fault of “covid, 
not our policies”, says Claudia Sheinbaum, 
the ruling-party mayor of Mexico City. On 
May 21st Mr Lopez Obrador said he planned 
to replace the respected central-bank gov- 
ernor with an (unnamed) economist 
“strongly in favour of moral economics”. 

On a collapsed overpass in Mexico City, 
someone has scrawled: “Was it worth the 
bribe?” At least 26 people died when a train 
fell off it in May. Bystanders speculate that 
someone took a backhander to ignore 
shoddy construction or maintenance. “It 
had cracks. You could see them,’ fumes Ga- 
briel Gonzales, a local taco seller. He com- 
plains about rising prices, the baleful ef- 
fect of covid-19 on his business, and the 
lack of government support. The presi- 
dent’s party, Morena, “is as bad as the rest 
of them,” he grumbles. 

The election on June 6th may not deliv- 
er as big a blow to the president’s party as it 
deserves. To oversimplify, it hinges on 
whether Mr Lopez Obrador’s personal pop- 
ularity outweighs his woeful record. His 
approval rating is a healthy 61%, yet polls 
show most Mexicans are unhappy about 
the economy, public safety and corruption. 

Morena is less popular than the presi- 
dent. Itis ahead of its rivals in the polls, but 
its lead is slipping. A few months ago its 
leaders said they expected to win a two- 
thirds majority of the 500 federal deputies, 
a dozen of the 15 governor races and the 
vast majority of the local congresses. Now 
they are tempering expectations. 





=| L i 


Money doesn't grow on trees 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


The campaign has been dirty. The oppo- 
sition say it is no coincidence that, when 
Morena’s candidate for governor of the rich 
northern state of Nuevo Leon flagged in the 
polls, the attorney-general opened crimi- 
nal cases against the two leading opposi- 
tion candidates. More than 30 candidates 
have been murdered. 

Nonetheless Mr Lopez Obrador is ex- 
pected to keep control with the help of al- 
lied parties (see chart on previous page). 
The opposition—the Institutional Revolu- 
tionary Party (PRI), which ruled Mexico for 
seven decades until 2000, and the National 
Action Party (PAN)—are a mess. Given Mr 
Lopez Obrador’s record, they should be do- 
ing far better. But neither has worked out 
why the president is so popular. (It is be- 
cause previous regimes were so self-serv- 
ing and out of touch.) Neither offers acom- 
pelling vision. A newer party, the centre- 
left Citizens’ Movement (CM), shows more 
promise. It controls Jalisco and may win 
Nuevo Leon; together, these big industrial 
States generate 15% of GDP. 


Going rogue 
The opposition’s greatest fear has been that 
Mr Lopez Obrador might win enough pow- 
er to change the constitution. For that, he 
would need two-thirds of both houses of 
the legislature and a majority of state legis- 
latures. That seems unlikely: he does not 
have a majority in the upper house, whose 
Seats are notin play in this election. But his 
critics now worry that if he does badly at 
the polls, he may double down on extra- 
legal means of transforming the country. 
His party will dominate the poorer 
states of the south. The opposition will 
dominate the richer north. More than ever, 
there will be two Mexicos: one, a dynamic 
and integrated part of North America; the 
other, remote, backward and resentful. 
And one charismatic politician, sure of his 
own righteousness, will be stirring up rage 
for atleast three more years. @ 


= 


in 


Red-faced 


DALLAS 


Why the Texas legislature is becoming more radical 


EXANS PRIZE efficiency. They like to 
Tetiae “you” and “all” into a single-sylla- 
ble word, and instead of the state govern- 
ment meeting annually, its citizen legisla- 
tors are in session only every other year to 
discuss the budget and pass new laws. 
(This is despite Texas boasting the ninth- 
largest economy in the world, ahead of Bra- 
Zil’s.) May 31st marks the end of the current 
legislative session in Austin, but the im- 
pact of the past few months will be felt for 
longer. “This was the most conservative 
Session I’ve seen in 30 years,’ says Evan 
Smith of the Texas Tribune, which keeps 
tabs on the state capitol. 

If Texas is dancing the two-step, it is do- 
ing so with two right feet. Bills that might 
not have even been given a hearing in pre- 
vious legislative sessions are passing both 
Republican-controlled chambers of the 
State legislature and being signed by the 
Republican governor, Greg Abbott. This in- 
cludes one of the most restrictive abortion 
laws in the country, which bans the proce- 
dure as early as six weeks and makes no ex- 
ception for rape or incest. “Permitless car- 
ry’, which enables those over the age of 21 


to carry a handgun with them in public 
without going through training, finger- 
printing or a background check, has also 
passed the legislature and will soon be 
signed into law. What once seemed a fringe 
preoccupation of a few lawmakers is now 
mainstream among Texas Repulicans. 

The same is true of a new voting bill, 
which puts restrictions on polling places 
and their hours of operation, and was ex- 
pected to be signed into law as The Econo- 
mist went to press. The session also under- 
lined where the front-line in the culture- 
wars is now: there was a bill banning the 
teaching of critical race theory (a particular 


22 Assessing the George Floyd Act 
23 Migration and foreign policy 

23 It's infrastructure year 

24 The Sagebrush Rebellion, contd. 
25 New York’s new island 


26 Lexington: The Kamala dilemma 





approach to historical racial bias) in 
schools. One preventing transgender stu- 
dents from joining school sports teams 
that match the gender with which they 
identify narrowly missed a deadline. An- 
other bill being considered would require 
sports teams that do business with the 
State to play the national anthem at every 
game. “Just when you think Texas couldn't 
go further to the right, here we are,” says 
Mark Jones of Rice University. 

This rightward-step took many by sur- 
prise, because the last time legislators con- 
vened the bills they passed were more con- 
cerned with governing than signalling. 
That session had followed Democratic 
gains in 2018, when Beto O’Rourke ran for 
the us Senate. In response Republicans 
adopted a strategy of self-preservation, 
mostly avoiding polarising social issues 
and focusing instead on priorities for 
Mainstream voters, such as increasing 
funding for public education and capping 
property taxes. 

Since then, the 2020 election has em- 
boldened Republicans, who see self-pres- 
ervation rather differently now. After 
boasting that they could well take control 
of the state House, Democrats failed to 
make inroads, both because campaigning 
was constrained by covid-19 and because 
national progressive rhetoric did not play 
well in Texas. Republicans have seized on 
this, and are using this legislative session 
to establish their credentials ahead of next 
years mid-term elections, when all 31 
members of the Senate are up for election. » 


United States 


Members of the legislature fear Demo- 
crats less than losing to a conservative rival 
in the primary. “Nobody cares about No- 
vember any more,’ says Jason Sabo of Fron- 
tera Strategy, a lobbying firm. “The only 
thing that matters is March, and the only 
way to lose a Republican primary is if 
someone makes you look too liberal.” Mr 
Abbott, too, is using this legislative session 
to fend off conservative primary challeng- 
ers next year, when he is up for re-election. 
He is believed to have presidential aspira- 
tions, and views the state’s fame for some 
of its more Trumpian laws as thoroughly 
good for his own national brand. 

Texas may be a bellwether for national 
politics. It is also a showcase for the linger- 
ing influence of Donald Trump and his ac- 
olytes. Dan Patrick, the lieutenant-gover- 
nor, twice chaired Mr Trump’s campaign in 
Texas. The state’s voting bill panders to the 
former president’s false claims of electoral 
fraud. “The only people who were at the 
Capitol in Austin were legislators and older 
white male lobbyists in pinstripe suits and 
cowboy boots,’ says Mr Sabo. “I have seen 
more American-flag-wear in the last 25 
days than I have in the last 25 years,” he 
adds. “It’s like a Trump rally.” 

Meanwhile, plenty has been left un- 
done. Consider Dallas Independent School 
District (DISD), the state’s second-largest. 
Michael Hinojosa, the superintendent, 
Says his biggest priority was to see that 
funding promised in the last session was 
not cut, a worry eased by the federal stimu- 
lus. But now, on top of trying to ensure that 
pupils catch up with the learning lost dur- 
ing the pandemic and the huge snowstorm 
in February, he will have to eliminate all 
black and Mexican-American studies 
courses at DISD’s 37 high schools and rede- 
sign professional training for all 22,000 
employees, because of a bill (which will 
probably pass) banning modish talk about 
accommodating people of different ethnic 
or racial backgrounds. Republicans enjoy 
bossing teachers around. Mr Abbott an- 
nounced that public schools and other 
government entities can no longer require 
masks on their campuses from June 5th. 

The trend of state government exerting 
power over local—largely liberal—cities 
and counties is playing out across Texas. 
The voting bill is another instance of the 
State trying to “micromanage’ by telling 
counties where to put polling places and 
how long they can stay open, says Lina Hi- 
dalgo, the Democratic county judge of Har- 
ris County, which covers Houston. Other 
examples include new laws to stop local 
governments from allowing homeless en- 
campments and to prevent them from de- 
funding the police (which they are not ac- 
tually doing). “We can finally retire the 
idea that local control is a conservative val- 
ue,’ quips Mr Smith of the Texas Tribune. 

Legislators will be back in Austin this 


autumn for a special session on redistrict- 
ing. Because the Democrats did not win 
control of the House, Republicans will 
have unchecked power to redraw districts 
to favour them. It will be hard to draw dis- 
tricts that last for more than a couple of 
election cycles, predicts Ed Emmett, a Re- 
publican who was county judge and lost to 
Ms Hidalgo. “If Republicans don't start 
talking about issues that the general public 
cares about, we're not going to be compet- 
itive,’ he says. Yet similar pleas from mod- 
erate Texas Republicans have been heard 
before, and ignored. 

Right now the headlines are focused on 
the bills being passed, but the session may 
be remembered just as much for what was 
ignored. This includes devising a plan for 
Texans who lack health-care coverage and 
shoring up the state’s electricity grid, after 
the February storm left millions without 
electricity and killed around 200. The leg- 
islature has not developed a substantive 
bill to prevent the grid from failing again, 
even though experts have warned that the 
Summer heat could cause widespread 
blackouts. Their elected representatives 
may leave them without electricity, but at 
least Texans will not need a gun permit. &@ 


Policing 


Body of evidence 


WASHINGTON, DC 
The George Floyd Act is a police-reform 
smorgasbord. Would it work? 


CCORDING TO INITIAL reports from the 
Louisiana State Police, Ronald Greene 
died in a car crash. This was in May 2019, 
one year before the murder of George 
Floyd. Mr Greene’s family was suspicious, 
so they pressed the police to release foot- 
age from the cameras worn by six of the of- 
ficers on the scene. Not all the devices were 
switched on, and it took a17-month wran- 
gle before they could watch the footage 
(the public did not see it until the Associat- 
ed Press leaked it, seven months after that). 
It showed the troopers repeatedly stun- 
ning Mr Greene with a taser, punching 
him, and leaving him moaning face-down 
on the road for nine minutes; he died on 
the way to hospital. The assault was re- 
corded on body cameras. 
After the murder of Mr Floyd a year ago, 
a police-reform bill named after him was 
introduced in Congress. It was passed by 
the House of Representatives but is pend- 
ing in the Senate. The House version en- 
compasses a range of policies, including 
restrictions on the use of force (any appli- 
cation of physical restraint other than 
handcuffing), creating a national database 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


TPO 


POLICE 


POLICE OFFICER 





Smile for the camera 


of officer misconduct, requiring federal of- 
ficers to wear cameras and limiting quali- 
fied immunity (a judicial doctrine that 
shields officers from civil liability). Would 
it actually improve policing? 

A large-scale study by the Becker Fried- 
man Institute at the University of Chicago 
found that body cameras reduce the num- 
ber of police misconduct complaints by 
17%. They also probably reduce the use of 
force. But in 2020 only about 8,000 depart- 
ments (about 45%) used such cameras and 
just seven states required them. The Floyd 
Act, as currently written, requires federal 
uniformed officers to wear body cameras, 
and requires state and local law enforce- 
ment to buy them with federal funds. 
Much of the Floyd Act applies only to feder- 
al officials: the Federal Bureau of Investiga- 
tion, United States Park Police, officers in 
the various federal departments, and oth- 
ers. They account for only about one-fifth 
of America’s 700,000 law-enforcement of- 
ficers. But the bill could nevertheless serve 
as a Standard for other departments, says 
Mark Levin, a lawyer at the Council on 
Criminal Justice, a think-tank. 

Just putting cameras on officers is not 
enough, as shown by Mr Greene's death. 
North Carolina requires a judge’s approval 
to release video footage, as does Louisiana, 
where Mr Greene was killed. Eleven other 
States also restrict public access to body- 
camera footage. By contrast, when Ma’Khia 
Bryant, a black teenager, was shot and 
killed by an officer in Ohio, the video foot- 
age was released publicly in a few hours. 
Ohio’s body-camera policy, signed by a Re- 
publican governor, John Kasich, in 2019, 
makes the footage part of the public re- 
cord. As currently written, the Floyd Act re- 
quires federal agencies, in most cases, to 
release any footage showing a death or se- 
rious injury in police custody within five b> 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


» days of being asked to do so. 

Some departments allow officers to de- 
cide themselves when to switch them on. 
Others have strict protocols for when a 
camera must be activated (at the start of 
any call, for example). Others use cameras 
activated automatically by sirens or draw- 
ing a gun from its holster. Such details 
matter. One study found that among off- 
cers systematically recording incidents on 
arrival, rather than using their discretion, 
use-of-force incidents decreased by 37% in 
comparison to officers not using body 
cameras. Among those who chose when to 
turn their cameras on and off, use-of-force 
incidents increased by 71% against this 
control group. Limiting discretion protects 
officers, too, argues Chad Marlow of the 
American Civil Liberties Union. “In the cli- 
mate that we live in nowadays, if police of- 
ficers have discretion and make the wrong 
call, a malevolent motive is going to be as- 
signed to that officer.” 

Some other parts of the bill are strongly 
supported by the evidence. De-escalation 
training—teaching officers techniques 
that require less frequent and less severe 
uses of force—was found to reduce use-of- 
force incidents by 28%, decrease citizen 
injuries by 26% and lower officer injuries 
by 36%. This sort of training, though effec- 
tive, is required in only 16 states. But not all 
aspects of the Floyd Act are supported by 
rigorous evidence. Implicit-bias training, 
teaching officers about their unconscious 
biases, has been implemented in 69% of 
police departments. Yet the University of 
Chicago Crime Lab reckons that, as cur- 
rently implemented, it is ineffective. m 


Central America 


Foreign domestic 
policy 


The Northern Triangle poses a 
migration trilemma 


AD THE protest not been on the Mexi- 
Han side of the border, it could have 
been mistaken fora rally for Joe Biden. Mi- 
grants sported white T-shirts emblazoned 
with the president’s campaign logo and the 
message “Biden Please Let Us In”. Critics 
say the president’s folksy manner is to 
blame for a surge in arrivals at the border 
that his administration is scrambling to 
contain. That may be unfair, but it reflects 
the discontent many Americans feel over 
his handling of immigration. It is one of 
the few policy issues where a majority dis- 
approve of the president’s performance. 

While some migrants—particularly 
from the “Northern Triangle”, as Guatema- 
la, Honduras and El Salvador are collective- 





Potential Americans 


ly known—may have been encouraged by 
Mr Biden’s promise of a “fair and humane 
immigration system”, most leave their 
homes for other reasons. Central America 
has the highest poverty rate, and some of 
the worst homicide and domestic violence 
rates, in Latin America. Families who have 
the means to legally move abroad do so, 
while those who do not will often take the 
long route north. Worsening natural disas- 
ters, such as back-to-back category-four 
hurricanes in 2020, also displace people. 

Mr Biden is no stranger to the Northern 
Triangle’s woes. As Barack Obama’s vice- 
president he oversaw an effort to reduce 
migration by dealing with its root causes, a 
job he feels compelled to finish, says Paul 
Angelo, from the Council on Foreign Rela- 
tions, a think-tank. He has requested $4bn 
in aid for the Northern Triangle and cho- 
sen vice-president Kamala Harris to lead 
talks there. Ms Harris will visit Mexico and 
Guatemala in June, her first official trip 
abroad. And he appointed Ricardo Zuniga, 
a senior member of the foreign service, as 
Special envoy to the Northern Triangle. 

Donald Trump froze aid in the hope of 
forcing governments to detain north- 
bound migrants. This may have contribut- 
ed toadip inarrivals. Mr Biden hopes to ac- 
complish something similar with pro- 
grammes to reduce crime and poverty. 
Some have met success: according to 
USAID, iN 2014-2017 community violence- 
prevention schemes helped to lower mur- 
der rates by 45% across 50 municipalities 
in El Salvador and 36% nationally in Hon- 
duras (other experts point to a crackdown 
in prisons and rumoured negotiations be- 
tween gangs and politicians). Mr Biden has 
not abandoned harder options, however. 
His administration struck an agreement 
with Mexico and the Northern Triangle to 
beef-up their border security. 


United States 


Yet working with central-American 
governments goes against another of Mr 
Biden’s impulses: fighting corruption. Ov- 
er the past decade the rule of law has erod- 
ed in the Northern Triangle, according to 
Transparency International, a watchdog. 
The Universidad de las Américas Puebla 
ranked Honduras and Guatemala among 
the worst countries for impunity (Mexico 
trailed not far behind). Both scrapped in- 
ternational commissions that investigated 
and prosecuted crooked officials. 

Finding a balance now falls to Ms Harris 
and Mr Zuniga. The vice-president has 
conspicuously avoided criticising Andrés 
Manuel Lopez Obrador despite some of his 
autocratic inclinations, in part because his 
co-operation on immigration is necessary. 
Meanwhile the Mexican president has re- 
buked America for giving aid to an NGO 
that has criticised his administration. 

Mr Zuniga has had a rocky start with El 
Salvador’s president, Nayib Bukele, who 
has bristled at criticisms of his govern- 
ment’s tightening grip on power. And the 
Biden administration has given a wide 
berth to Juan Orlando Hernandez of Hon- 
duras, who stands accused in a court case 
in New York of taking bribes from drug 
traffickers. The Uus-Northern Triangle En- 
hanced Engagement Act empowers the De- 
partment of State to identify corrupt offi- 
cials and deny them entry into America. 
Several names have been added to the list, 
including Mr Bukele’s cabinet chief. The 
problem, warns Andrew Selee of the Migra- 
tion Policy Institute, is that “in contexts 
where corruption is required to get things 
done, no one has clean hands.’ & 


Infrastructure year 
Build back under 
budget 


LOS ANGELES 
High construction costs will be a drag 
on planned infrastructure investments 


(4r-HHIS IS A unique opportunity,’ says 

Bent Flyvbjerg, an economic geogra- 
pher who studies infrastructure projects. 
“There hasn't been anything like it in the 
history of the United States.” He is refer- 
ring to the Biden administration’s $1.7trn 
infrastructure plan. A group of Senate Re- 
publicans have countered with a $1trn of- 
fer. Whatever the final number, how can 
lawmakers make sure the money goes as 
far as possible? 

The need to build new projects and re- 
pair old ones is not in dispute. Poor infra- 
Structure costs trillions in foregone 
growth. A third of America’s bridges are 
Structurally deficient. New structures, 


23 


such as seawalls and storm barriers, are >> 


24 United States 




















Pressing forward 


» needed to help mitigate the effects of cli- 
mate change. But productivity in public- 
sector construction has stagnated for de- 
cades and high costs abound, particularly 
where transport is concerned. The money 
needed to construct a mile of interstate 
highway rose threefold in real terms be- 
tween the 1960s and the 1980s. American 
subway lines often cost between two and 
four times as much as typical projects in 
Europe or Asia. 

Consider the James Wilson line, a hypo- 
thetical rail project named after The Econo- 
mist’s founder and paid for with an influx 
of Biden bucks. Even before ground is bro- 
ken, the cost forecasts are wildly inaccu- 
rate and prospective benefits dramatically 
inflated. A cost-benefit analysis is done, 
but elected officials discard its results in 
favour of political considerations. Mr 
Flyvbjerg argues that this all leads to the 
projects that look best on paper being im- 
plemented, “and the projects that look best 
on paper are the projects with the largest 
cost underestimates and benefit overesti- 
mates, other things being equal”. 

Soon, a press release goes out announc- 
ing the construction of the Wilson line. 
Immediately vocal pressure groups de- 
mand expensive changes. By insisting on 
additional features like walls to contain 
noise and paths for pedestrians, this stir- 
ring display of participatory democracy 
adds new costs. Spooked by the response, 
the government takes expensive, pre-emp- 
tive steps to reduce the likelihood of litiga- 
tion. A recent paper argues that such exer- 
cises of “citizen voice’”—and governments’ 
fear of them—are a big cause of soaring 
highway-construction costs. 

Leah Brooks, one of the paper’s authors, 
argues that legal and social changes in the 
1970s set the stage for this situation. That 
decade saw the rise of homeowners’ asso- 
ciations, as well the introduction of legis- 
lation requiring more consideration of 
citizens’ concerns. New judicial doctrines 














increased the ability of citizens to sue ex- 
ecutive agencies. The National Environ- 
mental Policy Act (NEPA), a landmark piece 
of legislation passed in 1969, delivered 
valuable environmental protections. Com- 
bined with a Supreme Court decision that 
enhanced citizens’ ability to sue the gov- 
ernment, NEPA provided a “judicial toe- 
hold” from which to oppose new construc- 
tion—whether or not the challengers’ con- 
cerns are genuinely motivated by a desire 
to protect the environment. 

Itis now time for a contract to be award- 
ed for construction of the Wilson line. Best 
practice is to give out contracts on the basis 
of cost, speed, and a technical score deter- 
mined by an in-house oversight team. But 
unfortunately the agency drawing up the 
contract does not have enough qualified 
Staff to conduct a full review of construc- 
tion proposals. The lowest bidder wins the 
job, as is typically the case in America. 
After winning, however, the contractor 
quickly tacks on additional costs, and the 
government is again in over its head. Un- 
able to manage such a big project, it ends 
up relying on contractors and consultants 
who botch key segments of the Wilson 
line, requiring expensive do-overs. Inter- 
agency turf battles and co-ordination pro- 
blems worsen the situation. 

For the Wilson line’s underground sec- 
tions, its builders choose to do things the 
hard way. Its stations, like those of New 
York City’s recently built Second Avenue 
subway, are unnecessarily large. And in- 
Stead of digging the stations out from 
street level in a so-called “cut-and-cover” 
approach, which is the (cheaper) norm in 
sensible places like Denmark , the Wilson 
line’s builders choose to mine them from 
within a tunnel. Alon Levy, who studies 
transit infrastructure costs, says such mys- 
tifying choices come about because Amer- 
ica has failed to copy other countries. Mr 
Flyvbjerg goes further: America has such 
an “island mentality’, he claims, that it 











The Economist May 29th 2021 


doesn’t even consider outside ideas for 
long enough to reject them. 

What can be done so that projects like 
the imaginary Wilson line do not go off the 
rails? State and federal agencies can ensure 
that teams have enough capacity to review 
multiple projects and to manage contrac- 
tors. Being too punctilious can backfire, 
though: New York’s exacting requirements 
are partly responsible for the astronomical 
costs of subway construction there. 

More advanced construction practices 
can also help. Standardisation of compo- 
nents like railway cars and subway stations 
can reduce variation, thereby shortening 
timelines and lowering costs. Transparen- 
cy and accountability are vital as well. The 
Army Corps of Engineers, which is respon- 
sible for maintaining more than $300bn- 
worth of dams and levees, records cost data 
but does not make them public. Ms Brooks 
says it should. To mitigate the effects of 
citizen voice, she also suggests a statute of 
limitations on litigation for some infra- 
structure projects. 

Donald Trump implemented NEPA re- 
forms which he said would speed con- 
struction, but which also did away with 
some valuable environmental protections. 
The Biden administration is considering 
rolling back these changes. NEPA has been 
used to challenge not just polluting indus- 
trial facilities but renewable energy pro- 
jects as well, and the threat of environmen- 
tal lawsuits adds to infrastructure costs. 
Mr Biden is free to roll back Mr Trump’s 
changes— but he should consider making 
some of his own. 


Conservation 


Wildlife wars 


DENVER 
The Sagebrush Rebellion never ended 


ACKIN February, Montana's Republican 
| 5 panos killed a wolf without a proper 
permit. Greg Gianforte, who is best-known 
for body-slamming a reporter on the cam- 
paign trail in 2017, trapped the creature 
after it strayed out of Yellowstone National 
Park and onto a private ranch owned by 
one of his political donors—the director of 
Sinclair Broadcast Group, whose 191 local 
TV stations might not frown on trapping 
liberals. A satirist could be proud of this 
Western. It also exemplified what Chris 
Servheen, a wildlife biologist in Missoula, 
describes as a new bout of “anti-predator 
hysteria” in state legislatures in the north- 
ern Rocky Mountains. 


Lawmakers in Montana and Idaho have >> 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


» recently passed a slew of measures to re- 
duce the number of bears and wolves in 
their states. In Idaho one law allows wolf- 
hunting from snowmobiles and all-terrain 
vehicles. It devotes money to private con- 
tractors tasked with hunting the animals 
down and removes limits for the number 
of wolves one person can kill. The law says 
that wolves can be killed so long as their 
number still exceeds the state’s recovery 
goal of 150 animals. That means 90% of the 
Gem State’s 1,500 wolves are at risk. Next 
door in Montana, Mr Gianforte has signed 
bills that, among other things, will extend 
the wolf-hunting season and reimburse 
hunters and trappers for their expenses. 

Wolves are not the only predators in 
legislators’ cross-hairs. Grizzly bears are 
still protected in the Lower 48 under the 
Endangered Species Act (ESA). But two new 
laws in Montana increase the likelihood 
that they will be killed, by banning state 
employees from moving bears that wander 
out of protected zones, and allowing peo- 
ple to kill a bear if they think it is threaten- 
ing livestock. Republican senators from 
Idaho, Montana and Wyoming have also 
introduced a bill to remove grizzlies 
around Yellowstone from the endangered 
list. Mr Servheen, who led the Fish and 
Wildlife Service’s grizzly-bear recovery 
programme for 35 years, says the laws 
amount to the biggest attack on the re- 
gion’s large predators since they were near- 
ly wiped out by settlers in the 19th and early 
2oth centuries. 

The laws’ proponents argue that the an- 
imals hurt ranchers and human hunters by 
preying on livestock and big game, such as 
elk. The data say otherwise. The number of 
cattle and sheep killed by wolves amounts 
to an insignificant fraction of Idaho's live- 
stock, and ranchers are compensated for 
their losses. There are also more elk today 
than when grey wolves were brought back 
to the state 1n 1995. 

Why, then, are Republicans eager to kill 
the West’s big predators? The impulse be- 
hind these laws is not new. Andrew Isen- 
berg, a historian at the University of Kan- 
sas and author of “The Republican Rever- 
sal: Conservatives and the Environment 
from Nixon to Trump”, says the threat 
wolves pose to ranchers is largely symbol- 
ic. The ESA was passed in 1973 and signed 
into law by Richard Nixon. The law called 
for the protection of threatened animals 
and, crucially, the ecosystems they inhab- 
it. But those protections were viewed by 
many westerners as Overreach by the fed- 
eral government, which, they argued, 
should have little say over how western 
lands are managed. 

The animosity towards the ESA and oth- 
er federal regulations on land use in the 
West boiled over in the form of the Sage- 
brush Rebellion in the late 1970s. The re- 
bels—a coalition of ranchers, miners, log- 





Tel = I 
a 


Were going on a bear hunt 


gers, Oilmen, local officials and western 
politicians—fought to pass bills that 
would transfer the management of public 
lands to the states. Ronald Reagan famous- 
ly told Utahns to “Count me in as a rebel” 
on the campaign trail in 1980. The Gipper’s 
election quieted the rebels, but fights over 


United States 25 


federal land flare up whenever the inter- 
ests of westerners in extractive industries, 
ranching or state government clash with 
those of conservationists and, lately, cli- 
mate scientists. 

More recently, Donald Trump's rollback 
of environmental laws gave would-be re- 
bels something to cheer. The Trump ad- 
ministration took grey wolves off the en- 
dangered list and reduced the size of pro- 
tected lands. State parties have kept it up. 
Republicans in Montana enjoy a trifecta, 
which means the party controls both 
chambers of the legislature and the gover- 
nor’s mansion. Steve Bullock, the state’s 
previous governor and a Democrat, would 
probably have vetoed the predator laws. 

Conservation once had bipartisan sup- 
port. That consensus, argues Mr Isenberg, 
broke down during the oil crisis in the 
1970S when the environment took a back 
Seat to the pursuit of energy indepen- 
dence. Perhaps that calculation will shift 
again. Meanwhile, the wildlife wars rage 
on. “It’s like watching a car wreck in slow 
motion,’ Mr Servheen says about Mon- 
tana’s new bear laws, “when it’s your car 
and your family init.” @ 


Island mentality 


THE HUDSON RIVER 
New York's newest island reflects the city’s spirit 


EPENDING ON tide levels, New York 

City is made up of 40-odd islands. 
Some are famous, like Ellis Island, where 
12m immigrants officially entered Amer- 
ica. Hart Island is where the city buries 
its poor. Rikers Island is a penal colony. 
But mostly, as former mayor, Michael 
Bloomberg once noted, “New York City’s 
smaller islands are our secret treasures.” 
Governor's Island is acar-free park. City 
Island is a fishing village. As of May 21st, 
New York has a new, manmade, one: 
Little Island. 

Little Island rests on 132 concrete 
“tulips” of different heights, which 
create rolling hills and winding foot- 
paths over 2.4 acres (1hectare). Designed 
by Thomas Heatherwick, a Brit witha 
talent for eye-catching public designs, 
the island is a whimsical delight. Like its 
neighbour the High Line, an obsolete 
freight track converted to public space 
which (in the before times) drew 8m 
visitors a year, it will be much visited. 

It is also characteristically New York, 
a city enlivened by madcap projects. This 
one was the brainchild of Barry Diller, a 
billionaire media mogul. Mr Diller was 
asked to help rebuild a pier destroyed by 
Hurricane Sandy. He was keen to do 
something more architecturally ambi- 


tious. The project faced several legal 
challenges: its creator almost gave up on 
what had become known as Diller’s folly. 
Then Andrew Cuomo, New York's go- 
vernor, intervened to Keep it afloat. 

Mr Diller’s and his wife Diane von 
Furstenberg’s foundation spent $260m 
on Little Island. It will continue to main- 
tain the island for the next 20 years. He 
says he understands people who Say, 
“Why should somebody with money 
dictate what public places are like?” But, 
he says, that misses the point. Having the 
resources means he can “braze it 
through” while public officials delay. 

The island opened just as the city 
begins to lift restrictions. Dan Doctoroff, 
Mr Bloomberg's deputy mayor, who 
steered the city’s tilt toward the west 
Side, sees Little Island as a catalyst for 
New York’s recovery. It is also part of the 
west side’s rebirth, which includes the 
High Line (Mr Diller and his wife were 
early champions of that too) and Hudson 
Yards, a huge redevelopment project. 
Google has leased some of the pier next 
door. To the south a garage for rubbish 
lorries is being converted to a sports field 
and a sandy beach. “The Key,’ Mr Docto- 
roff says, is to “create conditions where 
people want to do extraordinary things.” 


26 United States 


Lexington | Veep stakes 


Is Kamala Harris a gift to the Republicans? 











The Economist May 29th 2021 











ERE IS WHAT the millions of Americans who take their opin- 
Hions from Fox News and related outlets have been hearing 
about Kamala Harris. The vice-president was put in charge of the 
southern border because she “has brown skin”. Her picture book, 
“Superheroes Are Everywhere’, was issued to migrant children, 
maybe corruptly. (“Is she profiting from Biden’s border crisis?” 
tweeted Republican supremo Ronna McDaniel.) Metropolitan 
elites worship her; Vogue, which ignored lovely Melania Trump, 
put her (her!) on its cover. Her entrepreneur niece, Meena Harris, 
is an anti-white racist queen of cancel culture. 

In other words, while the mainstream media soberly cover Ms 
Harris's efforts to win Joe Biden’s trust and master her portfolio 
(which includes Mexico and Guatemala but not the border, where 
her book has not been issued to anyone), she is being relentlessly 
defined on the right as a dishonest member of the corrupt elite 
with an agenda alien to white America. Tucker Carlson—who dur- 
ing the election campaign refused to pronounce Ms Harris’s Hin- 
du name correctly—has neatly synthesised these two slanders. 
“She’s a globalist superhero. Just like Voldemort, you can’t really 
know how to pronounce her name.” 

So far, so predictable, you might say. But Ms Harris is no ordin- 
ary vice-president. As the first non-white, female vice-president 
of a party that has made diversity an organising principle, she is 
the presumptive next Democratic presidential nominee. It is hard, 
even at this early stage, to imagine her being denied. Given the 78- 
year-old Mr Biden’s age, her elevation could be only three years off. 
And the election that would ensue—the Republicans’ worsening 
derangement suggests—may well be as crucial as the one just past. 
This raises the question of whether she has what it takes to rise 
above the right-wing slanders and appeal to middle America, as 
Barack Obama did, or whether she will be destroyed by them, as 
Hillary Clinton was. And it is making senior Democrats nervous. 
“Everyone is saying, ‘Oh God, Kamala is next and then we're in 
trouble’,” says a Democrat close to the White House. 

Oratory aside, Mr Obama's success was based on an ability to 
reassure white Americans that was rooted in his intimate knowl- 
edge of them. The son of a white woman, brought up by his white 
grandmother, he promised better times for all and rarely men- 


tioned race unprompted. Ms Harris is a different case. She is the 
daughter of South Asian and Jamaican immigrants, brought to- 
gether by the civil-rights movement, who brought her up as black. 
Though nothing like the vindictive race-warrior of Mr Carlson’s fe- 
vered imagining, she leans into black identity politics more than 
the former president did. 

This is a good way to win elections in California. It would bea 
disastrous general-election strategy, as shown by the white back- 
lash to Mr Obama, notwithstanding his carefulness, and by Ms 
Harris’s failure to impress even black voters during her hapless 
presidential bid. African-Americans tend to support the Demo- 
cratic candidate who seems likeliest to appeal to white voters, on 
which basis they preferred Mr Biden. And her Hail Mary effort to 
turn things round by accusing Mr Biden of racial insensitivity dur- 
ing a televised debate (“I do not believe you area racist [but]...”) on- 
ly confirmed them in their choice. Polls suggested that black vot- 
ers found it cynical and insincere. 

The coverage of her current job has also been mixed. She has 
been accused of failing to carve out a well-defined “Veep” role or 
hire a sufficiently politically savvy staff. This is probably unfair. 
Her pressing need is to do whatever Mr Biden (with whom she had 
some making up to do) wants in order to make his administration 
successful. And she appears to be doing that. She was involved in 
the recent Middle-Eastern diplomacy. She is due to visit Mexico 
City next week. Though inexperienced in foreign policy, she is a 
polished front-woman who espouses Mr Biden’s internationalist 
views. The criticism of her seems rather to reflect not only the un- 
derlying anxiety about her ability to succeed him, but also the un- 
usual nature of her position. 

Ever since Walter Mondale upgraded the vice-presidency in the 
late 1970s, most of its occupants have spent four years trying to 
make themselves useful; then a second term, if it transpired, lay- 
ing the groundwork for a presidential run. The carping suggests 
Ms Harris is expected to do both things at once, which is unrealis- 
tic; and indeed she would be castigated if she tried to. 

There is one political task she cannot delay, however. That is to 
understand why her presidential campaign failed, which was not 
mainly to do with her race or gender, however much of an electoral 
burden they may be. Her stump speech sounded like group-writ- 
ten marketing spiel (something about wanting to “prosecute the 
case against Donald Trump”). Her promise—quickly rescinded— 
to scrap private medical insurance suggested a politician who had 
no clear idea where or what she stood for: whether on the left, with 
an emphasis on expanding the government, or towards the centre, 
with more focus on enterprise and opportunity. This was why the 
pundits and donors whoat first flocked to her quickly moved on. It 
was in turn why she resorted to playing the race card against Mr Bi- 
den. No wonder she makes some Democrats nervous. 


Kamala chameleon 

She should reflect on the fact that the centrist Mr Biden won as Mr 
Obama had before him: by promising hope, opportunity and to- 
getherness for all. There is no evidence that Democrats can get 
round Americans’ mistrust of government and vexed racial poli- 
tics any other way (however they may hope to govern). Mr Obama, 
a big admirer of Ms Harris, must believe she can pull off the same 
trick. Talking up her vice-presidential credentials was one of his 
two big political calls last year. The other was his initial dismis- 
Siveness of Mr Biden. It would be a terrible shame if the former 
president turned out to be wrong on both counts. 


‘The Americas 


Brazil's politics 


Losing traction 


SAO PAULO 





2022 : ) 4 PARTIDO? 





The Economist May 29th 2021 


ae 


MEU , 2022 





| BRASIL 


As his popularity fades Jair Bolsonaro turns to patronage 


HERE ARE many ways to describe pork- 

barrel politics in Brazil. They include 
toma la dd ca (give and take), troca de favores 
(trading favours), corporativismo (corpora- 
tism) and velha politica (old politics). In 
2018, on the campaign trail, Jair Bolsonaro 
used these and far ruder insults to dispar- 
age his fellow politicians, especially ones 
from the left-wing Workers’ Party (PT), 
which governed from 2003 to 2016 and was 
roiled by two big corruption scandals. As 
president, he vowed to advance his agenda 
without distributing cargos (jobs) or emen- 
das (amendments: ie, pork). 

The first sign he had given up on this 
“new politics” came in mid-2020, when he 
formed an alliance with a bloc of self-serv- 
ing parties known as the centrdo (big cen- 
tre) in order to shield himself from 1m- 
peachment petitions, of which there are 
now 117. Centrdo support is never free. A re- 
cent investigation by Estado de S. Paulo, a 
newspaper, showed that last year Mr Bolso- 
naro’s government forked over 20bn reais 
($3.9bn) through emendas do relator, or 
“chairman's pork”, a reference to the chair- 
man of the budget committee. At least 3bn 


reais were funneled through the develop- 
ment ministry to congressmen to fund 
public works and purchase farm equip- 
ment at inflated prices, sometimes 
through companies owned by relatives. 
The scandal, which the press has 
dubbed tratoraco (roughly, “tractor-gate’), 
is the clearest proof yet of Mr Bolsonaro’s 
participation in pork-barrel politics. It is 
unfolding alongside an even bigger public- 
relations disaster: a parliamentary com- 
mission of inquiry (CPI) into the govern- 
ment’s handling of the pandemic. The two 
crises demonstrate how Mr Bolsonaro has 
become increasingly weak and how Con- 
gress, which is known for virus-like oppor- 
tunism, has used his vulnerability to 
strengthen itself. “The more fragile the 
president, the higher the cost of support,” 


> Also in this section 

28 All change in Chile 

30 The Shining Path returns 
30 Canada’s Buttergate 





explains Sylvio Costa of Congresso em Fo- 
co, a Watchdog site. 

Brazil’s political system, known as “co- 
alition presidentialism”, is a hybrid be- 
tween the presidential model of the United 
States and European-style parliamentary 
government. The president directs policy- 
making and drafts the budget but cannot 
get much done without Congress, where 
his or her party rarely has a majority. Most 
of Brazil’s 30 or so political parties lack 
ideological platforms; they back presi- 
dents in exchange for patronage. This fa- 
vours vote-winning projects like paving 
roads or painting schools, rather than 
long-term planning, says Elida Pinto, a 
professor of public finances at Fundacao 
Getulio Vargas (FGV), a university. 

In 1994 six congressmen lost their posts 
as a result of a vote-buying scandal involv- 
ing fake NGOs. In 2005 a centrao lawmaker 
admitted that the PT was funnelling 
30,000 reais per month to congressmen in 
exchange for legislative support. (He was 
kicked out of Congress but is now an ally of 
Mr Bolsonaro.) In 2014 _ prosecutors 
launched a probe called Lava Jato (“Car 
Wash”) which revealed a vast kickback 
scheme among construction firms, politi- 
cal parties and the state oil firm. 

In response to protests, Congress 
passed a series of constitutional amend- 
ments aimed at reducing corruption while 
keeping congressmen sweet. Most emen- 
das became in effect an automatic allow- 
ance (not at the president’s discretion) for 
lawmakers to spend in their constituen- >> 


28 The Americas 


» cies. They had to follow new rules, such as 
providing receipts. But such restrictions 
made it harder for presidents to cobble to- 
gether a coalition. When Dilma Rousseff, a 
PT president, was impeached in 2016, it 
was technically because she had hidden 
the size of Brazil's budget deficit; but also 
because she struggled to manage an 
increasingly unruly Congress. She expand- 
ed her cabinet to 39 ministries in order to 
dole out patronage, but a recession in 2014- 
16 limited her scope. 

Mr Bolsonaro is experiencing some- 
thing similar. Brazil has had one of the 
worst covid-19 outbreaks in the world, with 
an Official death count of more than 
450,000. His strategy of downplaying the 
pandemic seemed to work last year, whena 
third of Brazilians received emergency aid. 
But this year a second wave has coincided 
with rising inflation, slow vaccination and 
a reduction in handouts. Mr Bolsonaro’s 
approval rating has fallen from 40% to be- 
low 30%. The speaker of the lower house, 
Arthur Lira, the only person who can open 
impeachment proceedings, warned of “bit- 
ter political remedies”. 

But impeachment is unlikely, partly be- 
cause Mr Bolsonaro in effect reinvented 
chairman’s pork at the end of 2019. Most of 
the new allowances went to lawmakers 
who voted for Mr Lira and the centrdo’s pick 
to head the Senate, Rodrigo Pacheco, in 
leadership elections in February. Docu- 
ments on government sites account for on- 
ly around 1bn of the 3bn reais spent by the 
development ministry. The budget chair- 
man, Domingos Neto, sent 110m reais to a 
city of 59,000 people of which his mother 
is the mayor. The ministry agreed to pay 
500,000 reais apiece for tractors listed as 
costing 200,000. It insists that there were 
no irregularities. 

A bigger threat to Mr Bolsonaro’s popu- 
larity is the CPI, which began hearing testi- 
mony in the Senate this month. Its daily 
sessions are broadcast live on TV, creating 
a macabre oral history of Brazil's pandemic 
disaster. Two former health ministers said 
that the government’s initial strategy rest- 
ed on herd immunity and hydroxychloro- 
quine, an anti-malarial drug promoted by 
Donald Trump. A Pfizer executive said that 
the government ignored six offers to sell 
Brazil vaccines. The health minister at the 
time, Eduardo Pazuello, a general who was 
also in charge when the city of Manaus ran 
out of oxygen, tried to skip testifying by 
saying he might have covid-19 himself. 

Mr Bolsonaro “is becoming a prisoner 
of his unpopularity”, says Alessandro Mo- 
lon, the leader of the opposition in the low- 
er house. The latest polls show the presi- 
dent’s support falling in nearly every con- 
Stituency, including among his strongest 
backers, such as evangelical Christians. 
His top rival in the 2022 election is likely to 
be Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, a former PT 


president whose popularity has recently 
increased. One poll suggests that if a runoff 
election were held tomorrow, 55% would 
pick him against just 32% for Mr Bolsonaro 
(the rest said neither). When Brazilians see 
Europeans and Americans getting vacci- 
nated, they realise “our president is a cari- 
cature,’ says Ciro Gomes, a former gover- 
nor who also plans to run. 

Mr Bolsonaro could recover before next 
year’s election. Vaccination is at last pro- 
gressing and the economy is doing better 
than feared. The economy minister, Paulo 
Guedes, has urged Congress to reform tax- 
es and the public sector. This would free up 
money for vote-winning programmes, he 
argues. But lawmakers want handouts too. 
“The centrdo is not loyal,’ warns Rebeca Lu- 
cena of BMJ, a consultancy. “If the ship is 
sinking, it willjump to another.” @ 


Chilean politics 


New faces galore 


SANTIAGO 
An electoral surprise in Chile may 
produce a left-wing constitution 


N CHILE THE covid-19 pandemic has had 
many victims, but fora while the govern- 
ment was not among them. In late 2019 and 
early 2020 the country was rocked by prot- 
ests in which 30 people died. It seemed 
likely that the unrest would topple the cen- 
tre-right government of President Sebas- 
tian Pinera. But he held on by agreeing to 
draft a new constitution to replace the one 
introduced in 1980 by Augusto Pinochet, a 
military dictator who ruled Chile from 1973 
to 1990. Mr Pinera was helped by the pan- 
demic, which took people off the streets 
and caused the protests to fizzle. 
On May 15th and 16th, however, Chil- 


Party time is over 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


eans used the ballot box rather than the 
street to express their rage. Independent 
candidates (some, confusingly, affiliated 
to party lists) grabbed 88 of the 155 seats in 
the convention to draft anew constitution. 
With the seats reserved for indigenous 
people, roughly 68% of participants will be 
independent, more than the two-thirds 
majority needed to approve the wording of 
the new constitution. Mr Pifiera’s coalition 
failed to win the third of seats it expected, 
depriving it of a veto. 

Corruption scandals and anger about 
inequality caused the landslide. “People 
can't stand it any more,” says Cristina Do- 
rador, a biologist elected as an indepen- 
dent for Antofagasta region, the country’s 
mining heartland. “People wouldn't talk to 
us about our campaign until we said we 
were independents.” 

For decades, Chileans benefited from a 
strong economy and falling rates of pover- 
ty, thanks to free-market policies. But ma- 
ny felt left out. Pensions and health care 
are most generous for those with good 
jobs. Those in informal work, 27% of the la- 
bour force, are much worse-off. Other pub- 
lic services are often mediocre. 

Only 2% of Chileans trust political par- 
ties, according to a recent poll by the Cen- 
tre for Public Studies, a think-tank in San- 
tiago, the capital. The members of the new- 
ly elected convention include midwives, a 
mechanic, teachers and students. By law, 
half are women—unlike Congress and the 
top ranks of the main political parties, 
which are dominated by men. “The con- 
vention is a much better reflection of Chile 
than Congress,’ says Juan Pablo Luna, a po- 
litical scientist at the Catholic University. 

It is also more left-wing. Many of the in- 
dependents’ manifestos called for a consti- 
tution that requires a more generous wel- 
fare state and limits the private-sector’s 
role in providing public services. Most 
Chileans seem to want more protection for 
the environment, too. This may lead to b> 










* 
few Dean & | c 
Mets Tete © er *) * 
log Dem © 1 Geo * 
Onrnena 
Depes(hoss @& |. ‘* 
Gina Bani 
Mar wf ® it # 
oS (hew 





012 





Media P ool 


Br: 1 


‘a 
Blackmagicdesign @ 


Cec Epcot 
P j LE i _ _ i , “ay | 
os Efe: HH. 264 MS Proll © Yeai hate Viriied of A | 
‘Satan ian hed oe ' ae ete wots, | jake [wo] iatia C mmm 
Maga tie | 2h pm ‘el SAPS eL ac 
Carce! fupert 


Introducing DaVinci Resolve 17 


mello laleo mee) (eo) mee) aa-vermVs(el-om sii amials 
same software used by Hollywood, for free! 


DaVinci Resolve 17 is a major new update packed with over 300 
features and enhancements! Colorists get new HDR grading tools, 
AN iil oF--X=1e Mu nats Le | Loum aat-\s1, Gum xe) (0) mm's'e-] 8 l=) amr) ale mm palola=eamar-llailelalme-lerer 
Ife laldallate mr lian ¢-\aeley-]com-lalom satel i-mcxel0 lave m=telidlalem cole) kom ate line) as 
get new metadata ‘slate’ view, smart reframing, proxies, keying, 
Fusion effects and more! 


Next Generation HDR and Color Features! 

New HDR grading tools, redesigned primary controls, Al based magic mask and 
more. The new HDR palette lets you create custom color wheels for targeted 
corrections, magic mask uses the DaVinci Neural Engine to isolate and track 
objects, and the color warper lets you morph colors in creative new ways! 
New DaVinci wide gamut image processing gives you even higher quality! 


World's Fastest and Highest Quality Pro Audio Tools! 

Fairlight features a powerful new engine that supports up to 2,000 realtime 
tracks with effects, dynamic and EQ. The new context sensitive edit selection 
tools and updated shortcuts make it even faster and easier to use, especially if 
youre switching from another system. You can now reverse clips, analyze 


loudness, view transients, preview video, move automation and more! 


rome M-Yo da Manola-Moj MAW AWA s)(oloL dnatelel(ae(-)iefaRexolan 


Powerful New Edit and Cut Page Features! 

A new metadata ‘slate’ view with bin dividers makes It easy to sort and find clips 
based on scene, shot, camera, and more! There's also new audio trimming on 
the cut page, Al based smart reframing for changing aspect ratio, anew portable 
proxy workflow that supercharges edit performance, render in place, timeline 
based syncing, compositing, keying, Fusion effects and more! 


Fusion Effects, Titles and Transitions for Editors! 

DaVinci Resolve 17 lets you save anything created on the Fusion page as an 
effect, title or transition that can be used on the edit and cut pages! New 
animation curve modifiers automatically retime animations when clip length is 
changed, there are new vector shape tools for motion graphics, shared 
markers, and audio playback with graphical waveform! 


DaVinci RESOIVE 00 ccc co cccccce cece cece eeteteesteteeee Free 


NZ} it] eo) (=m ce) am VA FKomme aval ale le)\ccw-]alem mialep.4 


—a 


‘fm « bh & Of itt + om 8 om Te 





+ Pig = | 


int | OD Pep | 








30 The Americas 


>» curbs on mining such things as copper and 
lithium. Chile’s private, inherited water 
rights are widely disliked as well. Whether 
the new constitution will create more 
entitlements than taxpayers can pay for re- 
mains to be seen. 

Though the independents have a super- 
majority, they are not united. Those elect- 
ed on party lists may toe party lines. A pleb- 
iscite to approve the new constitution is 
expected to be held in the second half of 
next year. Chileans will be obliged to vote. 

Yet even if the convention founders, 
Chilean politics will have been shaken up. 
Presidential and parliamentary elections 
are due in November. Political parties will 
include more independents in their lists of 
candidates. Some independents may even 
form their own political parties in order to 
run. Everything is up for grabs. @ 


Peru's election 
Commies, crooks 
and bloodshed 


LIMA 
A massacre in the jungle adds more 
misery to an already awful election 


S OMENS GO, it was a bad one. On May 
Asosra, less than two weeks ahead of Pe- 
ru’s presidential run-off election, 16 people 
were massacred in a remote village in an 
area known as “VRAEM’, the valley of the 
Apurimac, Ene and Mantaro rivers, where 
coca is grown. The area has been under a 
State of emergency since 2003. 

The motive of the killers remains un- 
clear. The authorities in Lima rushed to 
blame remnants of the Shining Path, a rad- 
ical left-wing insurgency. Leaflets justify- 
ing the murders were left behind with the 
bodies. In the 1980s and 1990s the Shining 
Path was responsible for tens of thousands 
of deaths. However, the mayor of Vizcatan 
del Ene district, where the massacre took 
place, told reporters that he thought drug 
traffickers were more likely to be responsi- 
ble (though both could be true). The vio- 
lence throws a grenade into Peru's already 
tumultuous election. 

On one side is Pedro Castillo, a rural 
school teacher who briefly shot to fame in 
2017 when he led a long teachers’ strike. He 
is the candidate of Free Peru, a hard-left 
party. On the other is Keiko Fujimori, the 
daughter of Alberto Fujimori, who as presi- 
dent in 1990-2000 defeated the Shining 
Path, but who has been serving a 25-year 
sentence for corruption and other abuses 
since 2009. Mr Castillo and Ms Fujimori 
were never expected to reach the run-off. 
Neither polled well in the first round cam- 
paign. But in a crowded field of 18 candi- 
dates on April uth, they came top, with 19% 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Udder absurdity 


VANCOUVER 
Canadians are in a flutter about butter 


T WAS AT the beginning of Canada’s 

lockdown last spring that Julie van 
Rosendaal, a pastry chef in Calgary in 
Alberta, first noticed that her room- 
temperature butter was not as soft as it 
Should be. At first she thought she was 
imagining it. But she tracked her obser- 
vations across the year. In December she 
reached a conclusion. The consistency 
and texture of Canadian butter had 
changed. In February she aired her find- 
ings on social media. 

Ms van Rosendaal believes that butter 
has become harder because farmers are 
feeding more palm-oil products to cows. 
(Palmitic acid can help them produce 
more milk.) Thousands of Canadians 
share her suspicion. The media have 
dubbed it “buttergate”. The Dairy Farmers 
of Canada, an industry group, at first 
tried to palm off critics with denials. But 
under pressure it switched to grovelling. 
It called an expert panel to assess the 
claims, and urged farmers not to use 
palm products. It is not just bakers who 
are cheesed off. The British Columbia 
Milk Marketing Board has also noted 
complaints from coffee shops about 
“non-foaming milk”. 

Lockdowns are partly to blame. Like 
people everywhere, Canadians trapped at 
home by covid-19 have taken to baking. 
Demand for butter soared by 12% last 
year, according to the farmers. However 
in Canada the dairy industry is protected 
by high tariffs, so imports could not fill 
the shortfall. Farmers also must stick toa 
“supply management” policy, meaning 
they cannot simply buy more cows when 


and 13% _ respectively, them 
through to the final vote. 

Ms Fujimori had already been making 
much of Mr Castillo’s supposed Marxism. 
Billboards across Lima encourage people 
to vote against communism. On May 25th, 
after the massacre, she accused him of hav- 
ing ties to the militants she considers re- 
sponsible, and thereby of threatening her 
father’s legacy. Mr Castillo denies any such 
connections. His supporters say he is nota 
communist. But a newly elected congress- 
man from Free Peru, Guillermo Bermejo, is 
on trial for terrorism for collaboration with 
the Shining Path 13 years ago. (He calls the 
accusations “pure fantasy”.) He has been 
taped saying that if his party takes power, 
“we're not going to give it up...we prefer to 
Stay to establish a revolutionary process in 
Peru.” Mr Castillo has not rebuked him. 


putting 





demand soars. Somehow, they had to 
make each cow produce more milk. 
Hence the palm oil. 

With lockdowns now easing, Canadi- 
ans may start baking less. But the farm- 
ers have other problems. In the Us-Mex- 
ico-Canada Agreement, a trade deal 
which took effect last July, Canada agreed 
to reduce certain barriers to American 
exports of dairy products. In December 
American dairy farmers filed an enforce- 
ment action, claiming that quotas re- 
main a problem. If Canadians can buy 
more American dairy products, they will 
surely be better off. But as ever with trade 
deals, the benefits are thinly spread 
across millions of households. The losers 
are few, but require endless buttering up. 





Ms Fujimori has problems of her own. 
She has been arrested three times and 
Spent more than a year in prison in pre- 
trial detention on charges of accepting ille- 
gal campaign donations. She was released 
a year ago as part of a scheme to curb the 
spread of covid-19 in jails. The Castillo 
campaign argues that Ms Fujimori would 
turn the state into a patronage machine to 
benefit the rich and well-connected. Ms 
Fujimori says that she is innocent and the 
victim of political persecution. 

Whoever wins on June 6th will face a 
mistrustful population and a fractured 
Congress, with ten parties splitting the 130 
Seats in the unicameral legislature. Thanks 
to a series of scandals and political feuds, 
Peru has rattled through four presidents in 
the past five years. This election may not 
end the instability. @ 





Myanmar after the coup 


Quaking money-makers 


SEOUL, SINGAPORE AND TOKYO 


Regional investors are having doubts about the military regime 


HEN TANKS rumbled into Naypyi- 

daw, Myanmar’s capital, on February 
1st, the man who sent them there, Min 
Aung Hlaing, the commander-in-chief of 
the armed forces, tried to offer the public 
reassurance. Though the civilian leader- 
ship had been supplanted by men in fa- 
tigues, the coup, he suggested, would be 
good for the economy. 

It was not an absurd claim: the previous 
military-backed government, in power 
from 2011 to 2016, was considered more so- 
licitous and efficient by many business- 
men than the democratically elected one 
that followed it. And although previous 
stints of military rule had seen America 
and other Western countries impose sanc- 
tions, many Asian investors had ignored 
them and piled into what had seemed a 
promising market. Some 90% of the total 
stock of foreign investment in Myanmar 
comes from other Asian countries. If busi- 
nesses around the region could be per- 
Suaded to keep funnelling money to the 
country, the general’s boosterism could 
conceivably prove correct. But the initial 
evidence suggests they are not quite as 


gung-ho as they used to be. 

In response to the coup, several firms 
are cutting ties with two big conglomerates 
owned by the army. Lim Kaling, a promi- 
nent Singaporean businessman, has said 
he will sell his stake in a tobacco joint ven- 
ture with one of the conglomerates, Myan- 
ma Economic Holdings Limited (MEHL). 
Kirin, a Japanese brewer, has said that if it 
cannot find a partner to buy MEHL’s stake 
in its joint venture in Myanmar, it will have 
to consider leaving the country. The Asian 
Development Bank has suspended new 
grants and loans while Japan, Myanmar’s 
biggest donor in 2019, has put new aid pro- 
jects on hold. 


> Also in this section 

32 Disorder in Myanmar 

33 Islamists in Bangladesh 

33 Australia’s frisky whales 
34 India’s covid-19 crisis eases 


35 Banyan:Chinalosesthe Philippines _ 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Many other Asian firms are packing 
their bags, although relatively few tie their 
move explicitly to the coup. Some 1% of 
the more than 180 Japanese firms surveyed 
in April by a group of foreign chambers of 
commerce said they had terminated their 
operations in Myanmar. The country has 
become an extremely difficult place to do 
business (see next article). Internet shut- 
downs, staff shortages and random vio- 
lence meted out by the security forces have 
forced many workplaces to close. More 
than two-thirds of the firms surveyed said 
they had curtailed their activities; income 
had declined for nearly half. 

Many of these companies are staying 
put, nonetheless. In fact, the junta insists 
that Myanmar will attract $5.8bn in foreign 
investment this year. That may be fanciful, 
but several of the countries that are the big- 
gest sources of investment are not them- 
Selves democracies, including China, 
Thailand and Vietnam. Companies from 
these places would not necessarily be put 
off by the coup alone. 

Some firms draw a distinction between 
doing business with the government and 
with the Tatmadaw, as the armed forces are 
known, even though the two are now one 
and the same. The Korea Land and Housing 
Corporation is a South Korean government 
agency that formed a joint venture with the 
construction ministry in 2019 to build a 
new industrial park near Yangon, the com- 
mercial capital. Kwak Hwan-gun, who 
runs the agency’s operations in Myanmar, 
rejects the idea that, owing to the coup, the >> 


32 Asia 


» state’s share of any profits will flow to the 
army. “I don’t know where you heard that 
the military benefits from this but it’s to- 
tally fake news,” he insists. By the same to- 
ken, Kang Ho-bin of Sun&L, aSouth Korean 
firm that has a transport business with RT, 
a State-owned firm, insists that some gov- 
ernment departments have managed to 
evade the generals’ clutches. 

Some businesses take their cue from 
their home government. For decades the 
Japanese authorities have argued that eco- 
nomic and diplomatic engagement can 
nudge the generals in the right direction. 
State agencies and investment firms have 
forked out billions of dollars of grants and 
loans to support Japanese businesses ven- 
turing into Myanmar. Some Japanese dip- 
lomats admit that the coup shows that the 
government needs to think again. Yet Ja- 
pan frets that if it abandons its projects, 
China will swoop in, says Kitaoka Shini- 
chi, the president of Japan International 
Cooperation Agency, the state aid agency. 

Debate about how exactly businesses 
should respond rages in South Korea too. 
Some firms argue that withdrawing alto- 
gether would hurt ordinary Burmese. Pos- 
co International, an affiliate of Posco, a 
South Korean steelmaker, has operated an 
offshore gasfield in Burmese waters in a 
consortium with Myanmar’s state oil and 
gas company since 2013. The National Un- 
ity Government (NUG), a government-in- 
exile composed of MPs unseated by the 
coup, has asked Posco International and 
other foreign energy firms to suspend pay- 
ments to the government until democracy 
is restored. Oil and gas is the single biggest 
source of revenue to the state. But Posco In- 
ternational argues that halting production 
would turn off the lights for many ordinary 
Burmese. Two-fifths of the country’s pow- 
er came from gas in 2019—although just 
20% of the gas from Posco’s business is for 
domestic consumption. 

There are no easy answers. The NUG 
suggests that gas companies should press 
on with production but should forward 
any money owed to the government to an 
escrow account, to be handed over when 
democracy is restored. Total, a French en- 
ergy company, has said that would put 
their local employees at risk of prosecu- 
tion and reprisals from the security forces. 
But on May 26th Total and Chevron, an 
American energy company, said they were 
Suspending dividend payments to a Bur- 
mese pipeline company in which the state 
oil and gas group has a15% Stake. (They are 
still paying taxes for extracting gas.) Some 
lawmakers in America, meanwhile, want 
to take such decisions out of energy com- 
panies’ hands by making it difficult for 
them to do business in Myanmar, wherever 
they are from. Far from creating an eco- 
nomic boom, the coup could result in an 
implosion. @ 


Business in Myanmar 


General disorder 


YANGON 
The junta struggles to restart 
Myanmar’s stalled economy 


N MID-JANUARY Thaung Tun, who was 

then Myanmar’s minister of investment, 
promised local and foreign business folka 
swift recovery from damage wrought by 
covid-19. Plans for whizzier internet and 
renewable energy, he said, would bring op- 
portunities they could once “only have 
dreamed of”. Two weeks later the army 
launched a coup, bundling Mr Thaung Tun 
and other members of Aung San Suu Kyi’s 
cabinet into detention. Some analysts now 
think the economy could shrink by as 
much as 20% this year. 

Business-friendly technocrats of the 
type who once advised Thein Sein, the re- 
tired general who served as president until 
2016, hold little clout in the new regime. 
The army has shut companies it believes 
are harbouring opponents, including ma- 
ny media firms, while also trying to force 
businesses it deems essential to stay open. 
The army is frightened by rolling strikes 
that have been organised in protest against 
the coup and the hundreds of killings its 
soldiers have carried out while putting 
down demonstrations. In March authori- 
ties in Yangon, the commercial capital, 
briefly detained branch managers from su- 
permarkets across the city so they could re- 
mind them to stay on the job. 

Four months after the takeover long 
queues continue to form at cash machines, 
which frequently run out of banknotes. 





lt cannot dispense confidence 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


People wait past dusk to get money, even 
though being out after dark increases the 
risk of running into trouble with soldiers 
patrolling the streets. In May an official 
from the central bank said that frightened 
citizens trying to withdraw their savings 
were in fact aiming to “disturb the country 
and create mistrust”. The junta has asked 
banks to send it CD-ROMS containing re- 
cords of all deposits and withdrawals. 

The army had earlier threatened to fine 
or nationalise banks that did not get strik- 
ing employees back to their posts. Quite a 
few have now returned. But the persistent 
threat of violence from security forces 
means many workers are frightened to be 
out and about for long. A Burmese employ- 
ee of a South Korean bank was killed in 
Yangon on March 31st after soldiers fired 
on a company van that was taking her 
home after her shift. 

Internet restrictions are making online 
commerce difficult. The junta started 
blocking all mobile internet in mid-March, 
in an effort to stymie demonstrations. In 
recent weeks it has started allowing access 
to selected online services, though social- 
media sites remain off limits. Investors 
were once keen on Myanmar’s digital econ- 
omy, which grew particularly swiftly dur- 
ing lockdowns imposed to control the 
spread of covid-i9. They had previously 
piled money into local firms such as Fron- 
tiir, an internet service provider. Not any 
more. Telenor, a Norwegian mobile opera- 
tor that began rolling out its service in 
Myanmar almost a decade ago, has written 
off the full value of its business in the 
country, at a cost of $782m. 

Restaurants and shops in the posher 
bits of Yangon have reopened, but custom- 
ers remain sparse. A fruit-merchant in the 
city's Chinatown says that although it is 
getting much easier than it was to tran- 
Sport produce around the country, “there 
are far fewer buyers than before”. A for- 
eigner who runs a consumer-goods busi- 
ness inthe city says he has yet to restart op- 
erations since deciding to down tools in 
February, in part because of worries about 
the safety of staff. “We are waiting to see 
what happens in the coming months, but it 
is hard to be optimistic.” 

Activists would like more businesses to 
take a stand against the regime. On May 
12th Tom Andrews, the UN’s rapporteur on 
human rights in Myanmar, said companies 
“should exert the maximum leverage on 
the military”. More than 200 firms, local 
and foreign, have backed a joint statement 
calling for democracy and the rule of law. 
But the army has a history of violence 
against the staff of businesses that upset it, 
Says an executive at a big foreign company. 
“Even as part of what appears to be civil di- 
alogue with authorities, in official letters 
and phone calls, the threats are there: ‘or 
else there will be consequences’.” & 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Politics in Bangladesh 


Back in line 


The government cracks down on a big 
Islamist group 


HE MOOD was supposed to be jubilant 

when Narendra Modi, India’s prime 
minister, visited Dhaka at the end of March 
to celebrate Bangladesh’s 5oth birthday. In- 
stead 13 people died in clashes with police 
after thousands took to the streets to de- 
nounce Mr Modi, whose treatment of Mus- 
lims at home is unsurprisingly unpopular 
among Bangladesh’s Muslim majority. Au- 
thorities have since arrested hundreds of 
supporters of Hefazat-e-Islam, the Islamist 
movement behind the demonstrations. 
The crackdown marks a change in strategy 
for Bangladesh’s ruling party, the Awami 
League. It had spent most of the past de- 
cade courting this puritanical group. 

Hefazat-e-Islam, which means “Protec- 
tors of Islam”, formed in 2010 after Islamic 
teachers from the city of Chattogram (for- 
merly Chittagong) united against plans to 
make inheritance laws more favourable to 
women. Before then the job of promoting 
Islam in politics had largely fallen to reli- 
gious parties such as Jamaat-e-Islami and 
its mainstream ally, the Bangladesh 
Nationalist Party. This changed after 
Sheikh Hasina Wazed, Bangladesh’s prime 
minister, took power for a second time in 
2009. Her government dragged senior 
members of Jamaat—who in 1971 had sup- 
ported Pakistan during the conflict that led 
to Bangladesh’s independence—through a 
war-crimes tribunal. 

Hefazat’s influence increased enor- 
mously in 2013, when judges on that tribu- 
nal declined to sentence a high-ranking 
member of Jamaat to death. Hefazat’s lead- 
ership decided that some of the Bangla- 
deshis who protested against this verdict 
had insulted Islam. Hundreds of thou- 
sands of Hefazat’s supporters marched on 
the capital to demand the hanging of athe- 
ist bloggers and the introduction of a new 
law on blasphemy. Instead of sending 
them packing, the government rushed to 
placate the mob. It brought charges against 
Several writers accused of upsetting reli- 
gious folk. It also set up a panel to police 
commentary on Islam. 

The episode helped forge an unofficial 
alliance between Sheikh Hasina’s govern- 
ment and Hefazat. Appearing to rub along 
with the group has lent the prime minister 
some credibility among the very religious 
(her father, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, 
founded the Awami League as a secular 
party). Ali Riaz of Illinois State University 
says that indulging Hefazat has allowed 


the League to signal that “we're against Ja- 
maat, but not against Islam”. 

The government has adopted some of 
Hefazat’s rhetoric and granted many of its 
demands. In 2015, when a string of atheist 
writers were murdered in the street, Awa- 
mi League politicians implied that they 
had deserved it. Two years later the govern- 
ment revised school textbooks to remove 
poems and stories written by people whom 
Hefazat accused of promoting secularism. 
Authorities also declared that degrees 
handed out in Islamic schools were to be 
considered equivalent to masters qualifi- 
cations from public universities, making 


Asia 


those who received them eligible for good 
government jobs. 

The unlikely partnership has brought 
about a swift Islamisation of Bangladeshi 
society, says Mr Riaz. More children are 
schooled in madrassas. Religious leaders 
are growing less tolerant of interpretations 
of Islam that differ from their own. Not 
long ago few people discussed which 
school of Islamic jurisprudence they be- 
longed to, let alone which sub-movement, 
says Mr Riaz. That has changed. 

Attacks on religious minorities are 
growing more common, according to an 


33 


American government report that was >> 


Humpback comeback 


SYDNEY 
Australia’s whales are breeding like rabbits 


OOK OUT froma clifftop in Sydney 
| Fenn this time of year, and you may 
witness one of nature's great migrations. 
Between May and November some 
40,000 humpback whales commute 
along Australia’s eastern coast. Itisa 
highway from their feeding grounds in 
Antarctica to the Great Barrier Reef, 
where their calves are born. 

They were once much harder to spot. 
Europeans started slaughtering whales 
for their oil and bone soon after arriving 
in Australia, and did not stop for nearly 
two centuries. By the time hunting 
humpbacks was banned in the 1960s, 
there were scarcely 200 left in eastern 
Australia. Another population, off the 
continent's west coast, had dwindled to 
about 800. 

Fortunately humpbacks are “the 
rabbits of the ocean”, says Olaf Meynecke 
of Griffith University. They have bred 
prolifically since people stopped butch- 
ering them. Lately the number swim- 
ming near Australia has risen by more 
than 10% a year. Joshua Smith of Mur- 
doch University says this rate of growth 
is “almost biologically implausible”. The 
creatures may now be as numerous as 
they were before commercial whaling. 

The federal government thinks it is 
time to remove humpback whales from 
Australia’s list of threatened animals. 
“No other whale species has recovered as 
strongly,” notes the environment depart- 
ment. Threatened creatures get extra 
funding and attention, and there is only 
so much of that. The government says 
that even if they are “delisted” whales 
will still be guarded by an environmental 
law that protects migratory species. 

Whale-watchers worry that this is too 
hasty. Lots of threats are “about to bear 
down on these beautifully recovered 






eel | 
» = — 


a t | | | 
| | ‘ .)' oe is. 


x 7 


f 
P ed 
= = 


Leaps and bounds 


populations”, says Wally Franklin of the 
Oceania Project, an NGO which studies 
them. Humpbacks get caught in nets and 
struck by boats. Oceans are growing 
noisier and more polluted. So far this 
does not seem to have curbed their num- 
bers. But scientists worry about climate 
change, which threatens the krill the 
whales feed on. They say the government 
should promise to monitor their pop- 
ulations, in case acrash comes. 

Compared with other Australian 
creatures, however, the whale looks 
lucky. By one estimate Australia is flat- 
tening a stadium-sized area of forest and 
bushland every two minutes, threat- 
ening creatures such as the Koala. Three 
billion animals were killed by enormous 
bushfires 18 months ago. All told, Austra- 
lia is losing mammals faster than any 
other country, says the World Wildlife 
Fund, acharity. Not many get a come- 
back like the humpback. 


- ALP 1 PP ig 


34 Asia 


» published in May. Earlier this year a mob 
ransacked a Hindu village in Sylhet, in 
north-eastern Bangladesh. The gang in- 
cluded supporters of Hefazat and members 
of the Awami League’s youth wing. 

Lately Hefazat had come to believe that 
it was “indispensable” to the government, 
says Niaz Asadullah of the University of 
Malaya. Yet drumming up demonstrations 
against Mr Modi now seems to have been a 
miscalculation. The group’s leaders appear 
to recognise that Sheikh Hasina, whose 
rule has become increasingly authoritar- 
ian, has always had the upper hand. In- 
stead of encouraging supporters to protest 
against the arrests of its members, Hefa- 
zat’s chief, Junayed Babunagari, has merely 
called on the government to release all 
those in custody. 

Unlike the crackdowns which Sheikh 
Hasina has launched against other rivals, 
the goal on this occasion is probably not to 
eviscerate Hefazat but instead to bring it to 
heel. Factions keen to repair ties with the 
government are already gaining promi- 
nence within it. The incident has demon- 
strated that Hefazat can be tamed, says Mr 
Riaz. “But the ethos it has created is not go- 
ing to goaway.’ & 


Infections in India 


The other side 


DELHI 
India’s covid-19 crisis is finally 
beginning to ease 


N LATE MAY India passed two sad mile- 
[stones in the struggle against covid-19. 
The official number of deaths from the 
pandemic crossed 300,000. Daily fatalities 
topped a record 4,500. Sadder still was the 
certainty that on both counts the true toll 
was many multiples higher. Across vast 
stretches of the country’s interior there is 
little testing for the virus, and therefore 
few “official” cases or deaths. Epidemiolo- 
gists agree that a full tally would put India 
far ahead of America and Brazil in the dis- 
mal rivalry for the country with the most 
people killed by covid-19. 

Yet even India’s faulty government 
numbers now give reason for hope. The 
parts of the country where counting is fair- 
ly reliable show a clear trend. The virus’s 
vicious second wave is rolling back almost 
as fast as it rolled in. In early May India was 
recording some 400,000 new cases a day. 
This has now fallen below 250,000. The 
daily number of new cases in Mumbai, the 
country’s commercial capital and one of 
the first places to see a surge, is about an 
eighth of its peak. In Delhi, the hard-hit 
capital, the share of covid-19 tests proving 


i] 

Over the top 

India, covid-19, daily new confirmed cases 
Seven-day moving average, 000 


400 
300 
200 


100 


2020 2021 


Source: Johns Hopkins University CSSE 


positive in April reached a frightening 
36%. This has tumbled below 2%. The cor- 
responding national “positivity rate’, 
heavily weighted towards cities where 
more tests are performed, has fallen from 
24% to less than 10%. 

In the main cities at least, the desperate 
fight to get oxygen to gasping patients has 
been won. Daily demand for liquid medical 
oxygen (LMO), which reached some 9,000 
tonnes—three times the demand during 
India’s first peak in September—has now 
begun to drop, according to a government 
task-force. 

Jokers point to another indicator of im- 
proving fortunes. Leaders whose visibility 
faded as the tragedy mounted have sud- 
denly grown less camera-shy. “You know 
cases are going down because...Modi has 
reappeared,” jested one tweet, referring to 
the prime minister, Narendra Modi, who 
recently appeared to choke with emotion 
during a televised Zoom call with doctors 
in his parliamentary constituency. 

But if panic is beginning to recede, the 
crisis is far from over. The wave started in 
the west of the country, broadly speaking, 
and has still not finished sweeping east- 
wards. Infections in Chennai, capital of 


Pretty gra phic 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Tamil Nadu in the far south, are only just 
beginning to peak. “We can't really be san- 
guine because it’s like an agglomeration of 
peaks,” says Ambarish Satwik, a surgeon in 
one of Delhi's biggest hospitals. “It’s going 
to move centrifugally from cities to villag- 
es, so it'll drive on fora bit.” 

Across India’s poor, crowded Gangetic 
plain, where doctors and statistics are 
most sparse, anecdotal evidence suggests 
that the grim reaper has come, snatched 
lives in every village and mostly then 
marched on again. It has left whole com- 
munities emotionally and economically 
shattered. A team of reporters from Dainik 
Bhaskar, a Hindi-language daily, counted 
more than 2,000 corpses hastily disposed 
of along ai,100km stretch of the Ganges. 

The victims are not only the very poor. 
A teachers’ union in Uttar Pradesh, India’s 
most populous state, says no fewer than 
1,621 out of the 800,000 teachers who work 
in its public schools died in the past 
month. Ata recent conclave of state-owned 
banks, which employ more than half a mil- 
lion people, managers said that around 
one in five staff had contracted covid, and 
that more had died of the illness in the past 
six weeks than in the preceding year of the 
pandemic. 

The wave has left scars. While India’s 
poorest, perennially battered by droughts, 
floods and capricious governments, 
among other plagues, have been forced to 
bear the calamity with stoicism, its middle 
class has been made to feel vulnerable as 
never before. Even the most privileged 
found themselves locked out of over- 
whelmed hospitals, or obliged to queue for 
vaccines along with hoi polloi. Their suf- 
fering continues. On social media, urban 
Indians are no longer messaging desperate 
pleas for oxygen, or for drugs that were 
widely and wrongly prescribed for co- 
vid-19. Now the demand is for medicine to 
fight mucormycosis or “black fungus”, a 
deadly infection that has particularly aff- »» 





The Economist May 29th 2021 


»licted diabetics who were too liberally 
dosed with steroids during treatment. 
Public frustration over the scale of the 
tragedy might have been soothed if the 
government’s vaunted campaign to vacci- 
nate Indians had been a success. Instead it 
has failed spectacularly. During the height 
of the surge in infections the number of 
people receiving shots did not rise to meet 
the threat, but instead withered from 3.5m 
a day to barely 1.5m because the govern- 
ment had failed to plan properly or to se- 
cure enough vaccine. Millions of Indians 
who received a first dose now wonder 


Beached 


when or whether they will receive a sec- 
ond. Many millions more—some 89% of 
India’s 1.4bn people—have received no 
dose at all. Their wait may be long: the IMF 
predicts that by the end of this year fewer 
than 35% of adults will have received a jab. 

The government, belying its own talk of 
determination to secure more vaccines, 
still will not license proven foreign ones 
such as those of Pfizer-BioNTech and Mo- 
derna. Bureaucrats refuse to waive indem- 
nity clauses, as dozens of other countries 
have done, leaving the companies to face 
the risk of endless, costly litigation in In- 


As China grabs more of the South China Sea, it is losing the Philippines 


HE DISCOVERY in March of 200-odd 

Chinese vessels around a reef in the 
“exclusive economic zone’ that extends 
200 nautical miles from the Philippines’ 
shores has brought near-daily protests 
from its foreign and defence ministries. 
Whitsun Reef, which the government 
calls the Julian Felipe Reef, is one of 
many that make up the Spratly Islands in 
the middle of the South China Sea. It is 
three times closer to the Philippines than 
to China, which lays wild and unsup- 
ported claim to nearly the whole sea. 

The swarming of Whitsun, led by 
“grey zone’ militia vessels masquerading 
as fishing trawlers, is the latest move in 
China’s expanding occupation of con- 
tested specks in the South China Sea. 
This time, most of the Philippine govern- 
ment appears determined not simply to 
roll over. As the defence secretary, Delfin 
Lorenzana, put it: “While we acknow- 
ledge that China’s military capability is 
more advanced than ours, this does not 
deter us from defending our national 
interest, and our dignity as a people, with 
all that we have.” The foreign secretary, 
Teodoro “Teddy Boy” Locsin, who has a 
notorious trigger thumb on Twitter, went 
further. “China, my friend,” he wrote, 
“how politely can I put it? Let me see... 
O...GET THE FUCK OUT.” 

Strikingly, the member of govern- 
ment most reluctant to criticise China is 
the president, Rodrigo Duterte. After Mr 
Locsin’s outburst, the coarse-talking Mr 
Duterte declared that, within his cabinet, 
only he had a licence to curse. He also 
found ways to praise China, including for 
the supply of much-needed vaccines 
against covid-19. 

On paper, says Julius Trajano, a politi- 
cal analyst, the president is the chief 
architect of foreign policy in the Philip- 
pines. After he took office in 2016, Mr 


Duterte tilted strongly towards the great 
power to the north. He refused to pressa 
ruling in the Philippines’ favour from an 
international tribunal, which rubbished 
China’s sweeping claims in the South 
China Sea. On his first trip to Beijing as 
president to meet his counterpart, Xi 
Jinping, he declared that it was “time to 
say goodbye’ to the United States. For 
good measure he announced a military 
“separation” from the Philippines’ ally and 
former colonial power. 

At the time, Mr Duterte was quick to 
boast of the fruits of his pro-China tilt: 
promises of big investments in the Philip- 
pines’ decrepit infrastructure as part of 
China's Belt and Road Initiative (BRI); the 
return of Filipino fishermen to the waters 
around Scarborough Shoal, into which 
China had muscled in 2012; and the pros- 
pect of Chinese help in exploring for 
hydrocarbons in Philippine waters. Yet, 
Says Jay Batongbacal of the University of 
the Philippines, it has nearly all come to 
naught. BRI projects are either small (a 
couple of bridges in Manila, the capital) or 
controversial (dams in nature reserves). 





Asia 35 


dia’s overburdened courts. 

In cities, where more people are able to 
get a jab, the vaccination campaign may 
have helped bend the current wave. But the 
main cause of the decline in numbers, 
aside from the virus’s own natural trajecto- 
ry, has been the imposition of tough local 
lockdowns. Mr Modi’s government, wary 
of hurting India’s badly wounded economy 
even more, had delayed these measures as 
long as possible. But in the end it was strict 
curfews, enforced by public fear of the 
rampaging disease as much as police mus- 
cle, that have saved most lives. 





Fishermen Say they are frightened to 
return to Scarborough Shoal, given past 
rammings by Chinese vessels. Maritime 
tensions preventing exploration for oil 
and gas, Mr Batongbacal argues, have 
influenced energy policy, leading to an 
overemphasis on coal. A flood of Chinese 
nationals to Manila’s offshore gambling 
industry has brought a host of social 
problems in its wake. 

Mr Duterte’s insistence that relations 
remain good is motivated by hopes of 
deliveries of Chinese vaccines, on which 
his legacy now rests (he steps down next 
year). To date, supplies have been paltry. 
And despite the pandemic’s ravages— 
more than 20,000 dead—Filipinos are 
sceptical of Chinese jabs. 

The president must realise that his tilt 
towards China has been a failure. The 
reverse of the coin is a renewed tilt to- 
wards America. A year ago Mr Duterte 
announced the cancellation of the bilat- 
eral Visiting Forces Agreement (VFA), 
which enables American troops to be 
deployed in the Philippines. Yet twice 
since then he has granted an extension 
allowing the vFA to continue, while Mr 
Lorenzana and Mr Locsin argue for its 
permanent retention. Meanwhile, Mr 
Duterte has at last begun to champion 
the arbitral ruling against China's claims, 
including to Scarborough Shoal. 

The Philippines is repairing its rela- 
tionship with America. In reality, it was 
never sundered—foreign and security 
ties run deep. Still, the administration of 
President Joe Biden has signalled sup- 
port. It has increased joint military exer- 
cises and has made clear that its mutual- 
defence treaty covers coming to the 
Philippines’ aid, even in the event of an 
attack by China’s unofficial militias. 
China may have won Whitsun Reef. But it 
has lost the Philippines. 


36 











Serve the rich 


HONG KONG 


aw ieee 


aur Alia W0e Wee 
Been Genk Gea Gane 
SUID O10 JEG eae a 
Bats BOVE ANNE ye 








It is becoming even harder for poor students to get into a good university 


FTER XIONG XUAN’ANG gained the 
A\capitars best score in China’s universi- 
ty-entrance exam in 2017, he was inter- 
viewed by Beijing’s media. The son of dip- 
lomats, Mr Xiong acknowledged that his 
upbringing had been privileged. “All the 
top scorers now come from wealthy fam- 
ilies,” he said. “It is becoming very difficult 
for students from rural areas to get into 
good universities.’ His honesty drew much 
praise online. 

Since 1998, when China began a huge 
expansion of university enrolment, the 
number of students admitted annually has 
quadrupled to nearlyiom. About one third 
of high-school students now proceed to 
undergraduate courses. Data are patchy, 
but experts agree that the share of rural 
students at China's best universities (the 
top 1%) has shrunk. Only 0.3% of rural stu- 
dents make it into them, compared with 
2.8% of urban ones. Most other tertiary in- 
stitutions are far inferior. 

Around the world, students from poor 
backgrounds struggle to compete with 
their richer counterparts. In China the di- 
vide is particularly stark. The main cause is 


the hukou system, which makes it very dif- 
ficult to gain free access to state-provided 
services outside the place where one’s 
household is registered. This means thatin 
cities, the children of migrants from the 
countryside are usually shut out of local 
State schools. They have to attend shoddy 
private ones that charge fees, or go to their 
parents’ village for an education that is free 
but also bare-bones. 

The situation is made worse by the way 
that university places are allocated. The 
best universities are concentrated in the 
biggest and richest cities such as Beijing 
and Shanghai. They offer a disproportion- 
ate number of places to students with local 
hukou. China’s two most prestigious uni- 
versities, Peking University and Tsinghua, 
are in Beijing. Their acceptance rate is 
around 1% for local students but only a 
tenth of that for applicants from places 


37 Hazing at weddings 
38 Chaguan: Cautious about Afghanistan 


SS es ere 
x mE LTB UT 003 

BOAR HAAG MHUe Bane 
16 ROME ang me ant 





a 





abit 


ee 


outside the capital, according to state tele- 
vision. More students from Beijing are ad- 
mitted to Tsinghua every year than the 
combined number of successful appli- 
cants from Guangdong and Shandong. The 
population of those two provinces is ten 
times bigger than Bejjing’s. 

In a paper published in 2015, scholars 
from Tsinghua and Stanford University 
said students with hukou in the poorest 
fifth of counties were seven times less like- 
ly than their urban counterparts to get a 
university place and 14 times less likely to 
attend an elite one. In those counties, the 
odds were even more Stacked against girls 
and ethnic minorities. “It is really, really 
clear that itis now much, much harder for 
a poor, rural kid to get into a good universi- 
ty,” says Scott Rozelle of Stanford. He esti- 
mates that around 75% of urban children 
go to university compared with 15% of rural 
ones. Nearly 80% of children under 14 have 
rural hukou. But writing in 2017, Wu Xiao- 
gang, now of NYU Shanghai, a Sino-Ameri- 
can joint-venture university, said less than 
17% of students in elite universities had 
rural household-registration before taking 
up their places. The pattern has not 
changed since then, says Mr Wu. “If any- 
thing, it may be even worse now.” 

That is because inequalities in society 
are becoming more pronounced. The chil- 
dren of wealthy families have access to the 
best schools as well as to after-school tu- 
toring and extra-curricular activities. Their 
parents can afford homes in good catch- 
ment areas. China offers nine years of free, | 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


>» compulsory education, but fees are levied 
at state-run senior secondary schools. In 
poor areas, charges can amount to more 
than 80% of net income per person, one of 
the highest such burdens in the world. 
Some students prefer to start work: a typi- 
cal unskilled factory hand can earn in a 
month what a poor farmer earns in a year. 

The national university-entrance exam 
was suspended for the final decade of Mao 
Zedong’s rule. Since its relaunch in 1977, 
universities mostly have relied on test 
scores for admission. In 2003 China began 
to allow some universities to recruit stu- 
dents with special talents such as in sports 
and arts. Again, the wealthy have been the 
main beneficiaries: only they can afford to 
pay for the training needed. 

For decades’ state-funded feeder 
schools in poorer areas played a vital role 
in offering good students from the coun- 
tryside a chance to get into university. But 
many have closed as a result of migration 
into cities. Meanwhile, competition has 
grown for places in good senior secondary 
schools. Ma Hang attended primary school 
in his home village. But the best junior 
high school in the county would not accept 
village students unless they paid extra fees 
or had powerful connections. His parents 
managed to use such a connection to get 
him into the school. He says that set him 
on a path that led him to a feeder high 
school and then to university. 

Rural children in China face obstacles 
at every stage of development. Babies are 
more likely to be undernourished and lack 
parental attention. By the time they enter 
primary school, many have ailments such 
aS anaemia, poor vision and worms. 
Around 60% of students from the poorest 
counties suffer from at least one of these 
afflictions, says Mr Rozelle. 

Those who, despite the odds, make it to 
elite universities often feel socially isolat- 
ed. In 2020 a student from the countryside 
took to social media to describe being “lost 
and confused” at university after leaving 
the “straightforward environment” of 
school, where passing tests was the focus. 
More than 100,000 students, many with 
rural backgrounds, weighed in, sharing 
their own experiences of feeling like mis- 
fits and lamenting their job prospects. 
They coined a new term in Chinese: xido- 
zhen zuotijia, meaning “small-town swot”. 

Wang Jianyue, a country-born physics 
whizz, can relate to their complaints. He 
chose to study finance at university, think- 
ing it would be easier to find a job with 
such a specialism. It was only after he saw 
several of his classmates get internships at 
big financial firms using their parents’ 
connections that he “truly understood the 
gap’ between himself and them. Mr Wang 
changed his focus to computer science. 
Unlike some other small-town swots, he 
has, to his relief, gota job offer. @ 


Wedding rites 
Will you mortify 
me? 


DALI 
Officials are trying to curb an old 
custom that has got out of hand 


ERVES ARE common in the run-up to 
N nuptials. Couples in some parts of Chi- 
na must brace for torment. Ina ritual called 
naohun, or “disturbing the wedding’, 
guests haze them. Often this involves forc- 
ing the man to strip to his underwear and 
don stockings ora bra. Friends then tie him 
to something and slather his body with 
sticky substances such as soy sauce and 
eggs. Firecrackers, taped to flesh, are 
sometimes set off; injuries ensue. Women 
can be targeted, too. Naohun allows people 
to kiss the bride and bridesmaids and even 
to grope them. 

Naohun rites were not always intended 
to humiliate. They began centuries ago 
with the aim of helping to put newly- 
weds—who often barely knew each other— 
at ease. Relatives would gently tease the 
couple in their bridal chamber, alluding to 
intimate acts. This served as a form of sex 
education. Rituals involving the groom’s 
father, such as making him carry his 
daughter-in-law on his back, were once 
cheered as a sign that she would be well- 
treated by her husband's family. 

But in recent times, naohun has become 
an excuse to be rowdy, lewd or even physi- 
cally abusive. In 2017 NetEase, an internet 
giant, found 142 cases in the previous five 
years of hazing so outrageous that it had 
featured in stories in China’s media. Half 
of the incidents involved binding and beat- 
ing. In 80% of them, grooms were the vic- 
tims. Only five involved hazing of the 
bride, but cases of sexual harassment may 
often go unreported. 


China 


The custom has faded in big cities but 
remains popular elsewhere. In the NetEase 
Sample, the provinces of Shandong and 
Yunnan accounted for 60% of cases. The 
practice upsets the government, which 
wants to create “civilised cities”. Last year it 
called for an end to “unhealthy marriage 
practices”. These included naohun, “extrav- 
agance and waste” at parties and “sky- 
high” caili—cash given by the groom to the 
bride’s family. In April the central authori- 
ties designated 15 areas in ten provinces as 
pilot zones for wedding reform. 

Local governments have responded 
with a flurry of directives. In Inner Mongo- 
lia, in the north, weddings must now be 
hosted by local “red-and-white councils” 
run by Communist Party branches (red 
stands for weddings, white for funerals). In 
some provinces, newlyweds must sign a 
pledge to eschew “uncivilised” naohun. A 
county in Henan province has capped caili 
at 30,000 yuan ($4,600)—less than a third 
of the going rate. Others have limited the 
size of banquets to 30 tables. Fines have 
been specified for rule-breakers. 

Even before the central government be- 
gan its campaign, the city of Dali, a popular 
wedding spot in Yunnan, had begun sta- 
tioning urban-management officers at 
well-known naohun locations. Yang Pin- 
kang, a 26-year-old local who got married 
in October, had no naohun. “My friends 
were disappointed,” Mr Yang says. “But am 
I not meant to look my best for my wife on 
my wedding day?” He says residents have 
gone cool on naohun since the drowning of 
a groom who was thrown into a lake. Mr 
Yang recalls how his uncle set his aunt's 
wedding dress on fire after friends dared 
him to crawl under it and light matches. 

No more such recklessness in Shan- 
dong province, officials hope. “Let us all be 
more polite,’ one city there, Zouping, de- 
creed in March. “Help weddings go back to 
being warm and romantic.” Consider it a 
marriage demand, nota proposal. & 





F 
+ -_ s. 


A part of tying the knot the government wants to bin 


37 














38 China 
































The Economist May 29th 2021 


Chaguan | China’s revealing Afghan strategy 


A suspicious China prepares for America to pull out of Afghanistan 





















































N MAY 9TH China's foreign ministry was asked to comment on 
O;n atrocity in the Afghan capital, Kabul. Terrorists had deto- 
nated a car bomb outside a girls’ school, then two more bombs to 
kill pupils running for safety. At least 68 people had died, most of 
them children. The attack was aimed at girls from a Shia minority 
that is often targeted by Sunni Islamist groups, which have 
brought much misery to Afghanistan. Today such groups are jos- 
tling for blood-soaked advantage ahead of a full withdrawal of 
American forces, at the latest by September uth this year, as or- 
dered by President Joe Biden. China’s diplomats could have re- 
sponded to the latest violence in several plausible ways. 

It would have been reasonable for the foreign ministry to tell 
the largest militant group, the Taliban, to rein in the mayhem, for 
China enjoys growing leverage over the Taliban’s leaders. That 
may seem counterintuitive. China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, has 
expressed hope that future Afghan governments will embrace 
moderate Islam: an apparent rebuke of Taliban-style zealotry. 
Across the border, in China’s north-western region of Xinjiang, 
officials have demolished mosques and banned young people 
from public prayers. In all perhaps a million Muslims, most of 
them from the Uyghur minority, have passed through re-educa- 
tion camps in Xinjiang, set up to cure them of excessively reli- 
gious or “backwards” thinking, and to turn them into biddable 
workers, loyal to the Chinese motherland. 

But the Taliban can be both fanatical and pragmatic, it turns 
out. Their leaders hope to rule Afghanistan soon, a quarter of a 
century after they first subjected the country to a reign of pious 
terror. Especially over the past three years, say scholars and dip- 
lomats in Beijing and other capitals, links between the Afghan 
Taliban and China have grown remarkably. Anxious for political 
recognition and economic backing from their giant neighbour, 
Taliban delegations have approved of Chinese plans to build 
motorways between Afghan cities. They claim to support a Chi- 
nese-funded project near Kabul to create one of the world’s largest 
copper mines, which has been stalled for years by concerns about 
ancient Buddhist ruins on the site and by fears of militant attacks. 

Privately, it is said, the Taliban have signalled that they do not 
care about Xinjiang. That relates to China’s main interest in Af- 


























ghanistan: to prevent that unhappy country from sliding into cha- 
os and becoming a haven or transit corridor for Uyghur militants 
who, China is sure, lurk in the region. Those fighters, China be- 
lieves, include some with combat experience in Syria, some 
trained by Iran, and others who hope to enter Xinjiang through 
lawless tribal regions of Pakistan. 

It would have been reasonable, too, for China to have asked 
Pakistan to help stem the bloodshed. Pakistan is the Taliban’s pa- 
tron, and has prodded the Afghan militants to establish ties with 
China. Pakistan likes to be useful to China, its most important 
sponsor. But the ministry chose a different response. After deplor- 
ing the murder of the schoolgirls in Kabul, its spokeswoman, Hua 
Chunying, singled out America for blame. She charged that the 
“abrupt” announcement of America’s exit from Afghanistan had 
“led to a series of explosive attacks throughout the country”. She 
called on foreign troops “to pull out in a responsible manner and 
avoid inflicting more turmoil and suffering on the Afghan people”. 

This is a new criticism. Chinese scholars and state media have 
Spent years accusing American forces of straying beyond their 
original mission to eradicate al-Qaeda and of spreading turmoil 
with their naive dreams of Western-style nation-building. More 
recently, they have asserted that America will surely leave behind 
covert operatives after its troops leave, in part to make trouble for 
China. In short, China believes that America has stayed too long in 
Afghanistan, is departing too hastily and is not really leaving at all. 

That line of argument is tangled enough. Making it more so, 
Chinese officials now call Afghanistan an area of possible co-oper- 
ation with America, along with climate change and efforts to curb 
nuclear proliferation. When pressed for detail, including at a re- 
cent meeting with American counterparts in Anchorage, Chinese 
envoys are vague. A few years ago China and America did jointly 
train Afghan diplomats and police. These days China stresses the 
importance of its Belt and Road Initiative: how the infrastructure- 
building scheme can promote Afghan development and thus sta- 
bility, such as by connecting the country to the sea via Pakistan. 

Afghanistan once saw remarkable co-operation. Early in the 
war on terror, President George W. Bush’s administration desig- 
nated a Uyghur group, the East Turkistan Independence Move- 
ment (ETIM), as terrorists. Chinese agents were allowed to interro- 
gate Uyghurs detained in Guantanamo Bay. They told one Uyghur 
he was lucky to be in American hands, since “as soon as they got 
him back to China, he was dead”, his lawyer later told Congress. 
Such joint action is unthinkable now: the two sides are so far apart 
on Xinjiang. In 2020 the Trump administration delisted ETIM asa 
terror group, expressing doubts that it still existed. China says it is 
a grave menace. 


To China, nothing matters more than stability 

China sees its positions as coherent. Singling out America as a 
troublemaker is logical. It also distrusts the Taliban, Pakistan and 
Iran, but those actors have reasons to bow to China’s will, so do not 
need public scolding. In contrast, America is a dangerous rival 
that has made bad mistakes, so is an ideal target for criticism. Chi- 
na may support regional or UN peacekeeping missions in Afghani- 
Stan, if its neighbour seems on the brink of civil war. But it will not 
send its own troops to keep order, at least under a Chinese flag, be- 
cause its neighbour is a “graveyard of empires”. Afghanistan’s case 
is revealing. China is emerging as a great power that—to an excep- 
tional degree—trusts in cold, hard economic and security inter- 
ests alone. To China, self-interestis wisdom. 


A process 1n pieces 


JERUSALEM 


The failing peace process has left the Holy Land looking like one unequal state 


Y THE STANDARDS Of the peace process, 
Bis not international law, Oranit is nota 
terribly contentious Jewish settlement. 
The Palestinians previously accepted that 
this hilly town of low-slung homes in the 
occupied West Bank would remain part of 
Israel in a future two-state solution. In one 
negotiating session their disagreements 
amounted to an area of about 400 square 
metres. It has grown into a commuter 
town, half an hour by motorway from Tel 
Aviv, and rates nine out of ten on Israel’s 
“socioeconomic index”, a measure of edu- 
cation, wealth and employment. 

Look east across the sun-baked hills 
and one sees Azzun Atmeh, an impover- 
ished Palestinian village. No easy com- 
mutes for its residents: it is almost fully 
encircled by settlements and the imposing 
Separation barrier. This is theoretically 
part of a future Palestine, but right now itis 
Israel, with most of its land designated as 
“Area C”, where Israel holds civil and mili- 
tary jurisdiction. 

The question of how to divide this land 
has been more or less answered, yet the 
parcelling out to two states has not come. 


Instead it remains under Israel’s control—a 
single state in which Jewish Israelis and 
West Bank Palestinians living a stone’s 
throw from each other hold very different 
rights and face very different prospects. 

Almost three decades have passed since 
Yasser Arafat, the late Palestinian leader, 
and Yitzhak Rabin, Israel’s prime minister 
at the time, shook hands on the White 
House lawn in 1993 after signing the Oslo 
accords. That hopeful moment cemented a 
formal peace process that would create a 
Palestinian state and end half a century of 
conflict. It was meant to happen within 
five years. Hope, alas, gave way to despair. 
It has now been more than five years since 
the parties even sat down to talk. 

Each time there is a bout of bloodletting 
between Israelis and Palestinians, it is de 


42 Gay Muslims in history 
42 Malis coup within a coup 


43 Avicious jihadist is dead, probably 





rigueur to urge them back to the negotiat- 
ing table. But such rhetoric obscures why 
the peace process has failed. Decades of 
meetings produced a mountain of maps 
and policy papers. The outline of a two- 
State solution is well known to all. The pro- 
blem with the peace process is not a lack of 
process, it is that process became a substi- 
tute for peace. 

To continue that process in hope of a 
breakthrough is to indulge a fantasy. It pre- 
tends that conditions on the ground—the 
Steady growth of Israeli settlements, Isra- 
el’s ever-more entrenched control of Jeru- 
salem, the schism between the West Bank 
and Gaza—are merely obstacles to negoti- 
ate around rather than insurmountable 
roadblocks. And it ignores shifts in politics 
and public opinion. Most Palestinians and 
a plurality of Israeli Jews oppose the two- 
State solution, as do two of the three gov- 
ernments between the river and the sea. 

It is time to admit the land-for-peace 
paradigm has failed. Moreover, it has often 
been unhelpful and counterproductive. 
The theoretical existence of a peace pro- 
cess gave Israel cover to entrench an occu- 
pation that looks permanent, and contrib- 
uted to the rot in Palestinian politics. What 
exists today, and will exist for the foresee- 
able future, is really just one state. 

The Palestinian Authority (PA), the self- 
governing edifice set up after the Oslo ac- 
cords, was meant to exist “fora transitional 
period not exceeding five years”. That 
deadline came and went, but the parties 
came close to a deal in 2000 at the Camp | 


40 Middle East & Africa 


» David summit, two weeks of sequestered 
talks between Ehud Barak, then the prime 
minister of Israel, and Mr Arafat. Conven- 
tional wisdom at the time blamed the latter 
for walking away; subsequent assessments 
offered a more muddled picture. 

Regardless, the failure at Camp David 
gave way to the brutal second intifada, or 
Palestinian uprising, which soured many 
Israelis on making peace. Still, more nego- 
tiations followed: the “road map for peace’, 
the summits at Taba and Annapolis and 
Sharm el-Sheikh. 

For the past decade these efforts have 
been listless. Barack Obama’s two attempts 
at peacemaking lacked even memorable 
names. The second segued into a brutal 51- 
day war between Israel and Hamas, the 
violent Islamist group that rules Gaza. 
There have been no direct talks since 2014. 
Donald Trump's “deal of the century” was a 
curious effort to solve the conflict without 
input from Palestinians. 

His successor, Joe Biden, seems disin- 
clined even to try. He played at best a sec- 
ondary role in broking a ceasefire between 
Hamas and Israel when they fought earlier 
this month. Then he dispatched Antony 
Blinken, his secretary of state, for a round 
of talks. The focus was to be aid for Gaza. 
The peace process was not on the agenda. 


Unsettling 

In 1968 one of Mr Blinken’s predecessors, 
Dean Rusk, sent a sharp memo to the Israe- 
li embassy in Washington. He noted re- 
ports that Israel was establishing civilian 
settlements in the newly occupied West 
Bank. This not only violated the Geneva 
Conventions, Mr Rusk wrote, but also 
“creates the strong appearance that Israel... 
does not intend to reach a settlement in- 
volving withdrawal from those areas”. 

Today more than 440,000 Israelis live 
in West Bank settlements, a figure that has 
grown roughly fourfold since the Oslo ac- 
cords were signed. The world has done 
nothing to halt their growth. Diplomats 
have accepted the fiction that the settle- 
ments are temporary, a claim belied by bil- 
lions of shekels invested in homes and in- 
frastructure over decades. Some settlers 
have now lived in the West Bank for two 
generations. 

Negotiators insist that big settlement 
“Dlocs”, which house about three-quarters 
of the settlers in the West Bank, are no ob- 
Stacle to a peace deal. Yet one of the largest, 
Ariel, sits almost halfway across the width 
of the West Bank. The blocs carve ribbons 
and punch holes in the outline of a Pales- 
tinian state (See map on next page). More 
than 100,000 Israelis live outside them, in 
isolated communities that would need to 
be evacuated—more than 12 times the 
number removed from Gaza during Israel’s 
disengagement from that territory in 2005. 

Settlers wield a level of political power 


today they did not hold back then. Five par- 
ties in the Knesset (Israel’s parliament) are 
ideologically committed to expanding set- 
tlements deep in the West Bank. Together 
they hold 56 seats, five shy of a majority. 
Even members of the Labour party have 
urged Israel to annex large chunks of the 
West Bank and end the fiction of “tempor- 
ary’ settlement. A poll conducted last year 
by the Israel Democracy Institute found 
that just 30% of Israelis opposed doing so. 

Mr Trump’s peace plan was widely 
mocked. But the map it offered, an archi- 
pelago of Palestinian territory connected 
by roads and tunnels and pockmarked 
with Israeli enclaves, was probably a realis- 
tic vision of how a peace agreement would 
look. (It still did not satisfy the settler 
movement, for which the very existence of 
a Palestinian state is anathema.) 

His plan did not offer even the pretence 
of acapital for the Palestinians in East Jeru- 
salem, which they have long sought (the 
area is largely Palestinian). Instead they 
would house their future government in 
dismal suburbs on the far side of Israel’s 
concrete separation barrier. That too re- 
flects current trends in Israeli politics. No 
big party accepts the city’s division. 

Jerusalem is now ringed with settle- 
ments, home to more than 200,000 Israe- 
lis, making it impossible to give the Pales- 
tinians a contiguous capital and difficult 
even to connect the northern and southern 
halves of the West Bank. Right-wing Israeli 
groups are using courts to try to expel Pal- 
estinians from their homes in Arab-major- 
ity neighbourhoods. The settler movement 
is not shy about its objectives. Each hill it 
claims in the West Bank, each home it seiz- 
es in East Jerusalem, makes it harder for Is- 
rael to cede the occupied territories in a fi- 
nal agreement with the Palestinians. 

The settlers’ spoiling is working, but 
they need not worry, anyway: there is no 
Palestinian leader to strike such a deal. 
Mahmoud Abbas has been president since 
2005, serving an endless four-year term. 
Two-thirds of Palestinians are unhappy 
with his performance; 68% want him gone. 


SS 
We can't work it out 
Israelis and Palestinians, % supporting 


By category ®lsraeli Jews @ Palestinians 
AONE 0 10 20 30 40 50 
Two-state solution Db 
One democratic state oe 

One unequal state 

where the other group eo 

is denied the same rights 

Transfer/expulsion o—e 

of the other group 

Other/don't know e-@ 


Source: Palestinian Centre for Policy and Survey Research 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Mr Abbas rules by decree, but he has no 
legitimacy to speak on behalf of Palestin- 
ians, half of whom are outside his remit 
anyway. The community in East Jerusalem 
feels adrift and leaderless, caught between 
the PA, which has no authority there, and 
the Israeli government, which most Pales- 
tinians are ineligible to vote for. The 2m in 
Gaza live under the rule of Hamas, which 
offers, at best, alengthy truce with Israel. 


Out of mind 

In Israel, meanwhile, the peace process is 
no longer a Salient political issue. That is 
largely thanks to the long-serving prime 
minister, Binyamin Netanyahu. He tepidly 
endorsed a two-state solution in 2009, but 
has spent much of his career working to 
prevent it. Foreign diplomats often say the 
occupation is unsustainable. In the short 
term, Mr Netanyahu has proved them 
wrong. The security situation is fairly 
calm, the economy hummed before the 
pandemic and Israel’s diplomatic position 
is better than ever. Last year it established 
overt ties with four Arab states. 

With no pressure to resolve the conflict, 
most Israeli parties either oppose the two- 
state solution or ignore it. The Labour par- 
ty, once the beating heart of Israel’s peace 
camp—it held a 44-seat plurality at the 
time of the Oslo accords—won just seven 
Seats at the last election. 

A poll of Palestinians in March found 
that just 40% still support the two-state 
solution, down from 51% in 2016 and 56% 
in 200. Support among Israeli Jews 
dropped from 53% in 2016 to 42% last year. 
Five years ago 82% of Israeli Arabs backed 
the idea; today 59% do. 

Yet Israelis and Palestinians are not 
Sure what they do support (see chart). 
Some desire a single, binational state, oth- 
ers an apartheid state. There are Palestin- 
ians who hope to throw all the Jews into 
the sea and Jews who hope to throw all the 
Palestinians into Jordan. The most popular 
choice after a two-state solution is to be- 
lieve there is presently no solution. 


It need not be a binary choice between >> 


Two-state solution 
80 





70 


Israelis* 
| 60 


3) 


Palestinians AO 


30 


a a 1. tot too 
2010 2 14 16 18 20 


*Includes Jewish Israelis and Arab Israelis 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


> one state and two. Some Israelis and Pales- 
tinians talk of a confederation that would 
split the difference. Both communities 
could fulfil their national aspirations, but 
with shared institutions and a porous bor- 
der. Both Mr Abbas and Reuven Rivlin, the 
outgoing Israeli president, have expressed 
openness to such an arrangement. 

It would face obstacles, not least that it 
requires creating a system of governance 
that does not exist in the world today. A bi- 
national state would have to overcome a 
century of hostility. Such challenges are of- 
ten cited as a reason to support the status 
quo: a two-state solution is desirable be- 
cause the alternatives would be hard. After 
three decades of failed negotiations, 
though, this argument sounds hollow. 

In his final weeks as secretary of state, 
in 2016, John Kerry warned that Israel was 
heading for a permanent occupation, a re- 
ality he described as “separate but un- 
equal”. His choice of words, a reference to 
Jim Crow in America, was meant to jolt lis- 
teners. Yet it was less a prediction of the fu- 
ture than a description of reality. The four 
groups of Palestinians in the Holy Land all 
face formal and practical discrimination 
compared with Israeli Jews. 

Start with Arab Israelis, as Israel calls 
them, or Palestinian citizens of Israel, as 
many (though not all) call themselves. 
They hold full citizenship, if not quite full 
rights. A “nation-state law” passed in 2018 
reserved the right of “national self-deter- 
mination” for Jews alone. The poverty rate 
for Arabs, 36%, is double that of Jews; their 
average monthly income in 2018 was 34% 
lower. The Supreme Court has upheld the 
right of small towns to screen residents for 
“social suitability’, a practice that has been 
used to bar Arabs from moving in. 

Palestinians in East Jerusalem exist ina 
sort of limbo. Most refuse to seek Israeli 
citizenship, waiting for a solution that 
never comes. They risk losing their Israeli 
residency cards if they leave the city; more 
than 14,000 have been revoked since 1967. 

A Palestinian born a few kilometres to 
the north, in Ramallah, cannot visit Jerusa- 
lem without a permit. Life in the West Bank 
is largely confined to the one-third of its 
territory under a measure of Palestinian 
control. Hundreds of checkpoints restrict 
freedom of movement. 

Then there is Gaza. To be born there, 
since 2007, is to be born in a place one can- 
not easily leave. Israel permits only select 
categories of Palestinians to cross its bor- 
der, while Egypt allows only a few thou- 
sand travellers a month (and some months 
none at all). Almost half of Gazans are un- 
employed and 80% need help from aid 
groups to survive. 

These divisions occasionally collapse 
during times of trouble, as they did this 
May, when unrest in Jerusalem led to rock- 
et fire from Gaza, riots inside Israel and 















‘4 East 


Jerusalem 


West 
Jerusalem 





© Palestinian built-up areas |e! 
B® israeli settlements 


_ @ Oranit 
Tel Aviv 


ISRAEL 


ou City 


Gaza 
Strip 


West Bank, May 2021 
Palestinian areas 


Separation 
Israeli areas barrier 


® Settlements — Built 
~ Municipal boundaries Planned 


Built-up 
~ Civil control 


Sources: Peace Now 


Military/civil 


protests in the West Bank. In quieter times, 
though, Palestinian leaders are happy to 
help perpetuate divisions among their 
people in order to preserve their fiefs. 

Several years ago your correspondent 
met Mahmoud Zahar, one of the founders 
of Hamas, in Gaza. In the West Bank, he 
said, Palestinians faced the routine threat 
of having their homes demolished by the 
Israeli army, often for failing to obtain 
building permits that are nigh impossible 
to get. Not so in Gaza: “Since Hamas took 
power,’ he said, “there has not been a sin- 
gle house demolition.” 

That would come as a surprise to Pales- 
tinians who recently endured 1 days of 
conflict. The fighting displaced more than 
70,000 people; some have no homes to re- 
turn to. A longer war in 2014 left an esti- 
mated 17,000 families, more than 100,000 
people, homeless. In fact, Mr Zahar was 
one of them: his home was destroyed by an 
Israeli air strike. 

Such is the emptiness of Hamas's rheto- 
ric. To the extent that it remains popular, 
that is largely in contrast to the superannu- 
ated Mr Abbas. At 85, he is old enough to re- 
member a time before Israel existed; most 
of his constituents are not old enough to 
remember a time before he was president. 
The PA he oversees was meant to form the 
nucleus of a future state. With no state on 
offer, today it serves mostly to distribute 
public-sector salaries and conduct securi- 
ty co-ordination with Israel. 

America alone has provided more than 
$5bn in aid to the Palestinians since 1994. 
Many in the West Bank wonder where it 
went, as they drive on rutted roads and vis- 


Middle East & Africa 


it overcrowded hospitals. Close to a billion 
dollars is thought to have vanished during 
Mr Arafat’s rule. Today Mr Abbas is more 
interested in prosecuting anti-corruption 
activists than pursuing corruption. As long 
as his security forces keep the West Bank 
quiet, though, the world gives hima pass. 

The endurance of Hamas and Fatah, Mr 
Abbas’s party, is indicative of how the Oslo 
era warped Palestinian politics. Majorities 
in the West Bank and Gaza think their lead- 
ers corrupt and authoritarian. But Fatah 
enjoys a measure of international legiti- 
macy because it accepts a territorial com- 
promise that is now a mirage; Hamas 
claims popular legitimacy by rejecting 
compromise and promising liberation, 
which is just as illusory. 

To discard the land-for-peace frame- 
work would mean a Sea change in Palestin- 
ian politics, reflecting a stark disjuncture 
between generations. Older people have 
spent a lifetime dreaming of an indepen- 
dent state. Asked why they do not abandon 
that dream and push for equality, they re- 
ply that Israel would never accept it. Many 
younger Palestinians disagree. The call for 
statehood, they argue, lets Israel frame the 
conflict as a struggle between two nations 
ona more or less equal footing. A battle for 
equal rights would put the onus more 
squarely on Israel. 

The two-state paradigm turned the con- 
flict into a land dispute. If negotiators 
could simply find the right path for a bor- 
der, the weary parties could retreat to their 
respective sides. But this is also a conflict 
over how two peoples should live together 
onan uncomfortably small patch of land. 


Delusions and reality 
Some on both sides cling to fantasies. 
Right-wing Israelis persist in believing 
that the Palestinians can be persuaded to 
leave or be consigned to live as second- 
class non-citizens, a cheap labour pool 
content to cross teeming checkpoints each 
day to till fields and swing hammers. 
Groups such as Hamas still insist they can 
outlast Israel, that one day the Jews will 
pack up and “go back to Europe’, never 
mind that most of them are native-born 
(and often descended from Middle Eastern 
Jews rather than European Jews, to boot). 
Here and there in Israel one sees a 
phrase in graffiti on walls in Hebrew and 
Arabic: ain lanu eretz aheret; la watan lanna 
badeel. “We have no other country.” The Ar- 
abs and Jews must decide how to share it; 
the world cannot dictate a solution. That 
will require a new peace process, a genuine 
one, with legitimacy and popular support 
on both sides. It is hard to envision such a 
process sprouting soon from such poi- 
soned soil. But to acknowledge reality 
would be a start. What came before has 
failed, and what comes next will need to 
talk less of partition and more of parity. @ 


41 


42 


Middle East & Africa 





Muslim pride 


Gay people are reclaiming an Islamic heritage 


OR DECADES regimes in the Middle 

East have alleged that homosexuality 
is both morally unacceptable and a West- 
ern import. Many gay activists disagree 
on both counts. Homophobia is the 
Western import, they claim, introduced 
by puritanical Europeans. “Ban the colo- 
nial law,” cried campaigners in Tunisia in 
December, referring to a law criminalis- 
ing gay sex written by the French more 
than acentury ago. “All these homo- 
phobic laws in the Middle East were 
brought in by colonialism to undermine 
Islam’s permissive civilisation,’ says 
Ramy Khouili, a Tunisian activist. 

History is complicated, and prejudice 
has ancient roots. Nonetheless, activists 
can point to periods of the Islamic past 
when Arab rulers were more liberal about 
sex. They relate how the Caliph Amin in 
ninth-century Baghdad had a male lover 
and feted gay poets. They read poems 
from a classical genre called mujun, or 
hedonistic smut. And they recall that the 
Ottoman Turks, who ruled most of the 
Middle East in the 19th century, decrimi- 
nalised homosexuality a century before 
America and Britain. Back then, “you 
could be with aman ora woman,’ says 
the transgender founder of north Africa’s 
first gay movement, the Abu Nawas 
Association, named after a great Arab 
poet, who was gay. “There were men 
dressed as women and living as wom- 
en—and it was normal.” 

“A Promenade of the Hearts”, a col- 
lection of stories and poems compiled by 
Ahmad al-Tifashi, a13th-century Arab 
sexologist, is experiencing a revival in 
Beirut’s libraries. The penis, he claims, is 
better shaped for anal than vaginal pene- 
tration. While much classical and Otto- 


man poetry features male lovers, gay 
groups are discovering lesbian poetry 
from the past. “How much have we 
erinded sister, ninety pilgrimages/ More 
delightful and invisible than the entries 
of the penis head,” reads a couplet. 

Gay poetry is not the only art form 
undergoing a renaissance. Muhammad 
Issaoul, who calls himself “a queer dan- 
cer’, adapts the traditions of male belly- 
dancers once common in Cairo and 
Beirut. He performs in Tunisia’s clubs 
and theatres clad just in feather boas and 
underpants. “It was natural for men to 
express their feminine sides before,’ he 
says. ‘It was just pleasure and art.” 

Some activists are examining old 
legal texts—and finding contradictions. 
Classical jurists upheld the Koran’s clear 
prohibition of sodomy, yet debated how 
deep the penis must penetrate to be 
deemed a violation. (Up to the line of 
circumcision, according to a standard 
work written by Shia Muslims.) The 
present-day jihadists of Islamic State 
throw gay people off rooftops, citing a 
reported saying of the Prophet endorsing 
the practice. But scholars have struggled 
to find historical cases of anyone taking 
this verse literally. 

This gay re-engagement with Islam 
has its critics. Many feminists are secular 
and see Muslim clerics as part of the 
patriarchy they want to topple. Still, most 
are willing to lend their support to gay 
people now facing arrest, torture and 
censorship by Arab rulers. “The problem 
isn't Islam,” says Rasha Younes, a Leba- 
non-based researcher for Human Rights 
Watch, a monitoring group. “It’s the 
oppressive regimes who want to control 
us and the Middle East in its name.” 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Mali 


Coup within a coup 


BAMAKO 
The leaders of Mali’s most recent 
coup do it yet again 


(47 T'S POLITICAL chaos,” says Kevin, a 32- 

[year-old teacher in Bamako, the capi- 
tal of Mali. The country, he laments, “has 
absolutely no future’. There was at least 
some cause for hope in September, when 
Bah Ndaw, the president, and Moctar 
Ouane, the prime minister, were appoint- 
ed to prepare for elections after a military 
coup the month before. But Assimi Goita, 
who led that coup and then became vice- 
president, is at it again. Messrs Ndaw and 
Ouane did not respect the transitional 
charter or consult him about a cabinet re- 
shuffle, claimed Colonel Goita. They were 
detained on May 24th, then stripped of 
their powers and forced to resign. 

Malian politics have long been tumul- 
tuous. Last year Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, 
the president at the time, faced big protests 
led by an opposition alliance called the Ms5- 
RFP and a charismatic imam called Mah- 
moud Dicko. Some of the protesters wel- 
comed the coup that ensued and hoped the 
army would clean up politics before hand- 
ing over to civilians. After much wrangling 
between the junta and ECOWAS, a regional 
bloc, an 18-month transition to elections 
was planned, led by a nominally civilian 
government. The junta, though, took four 
plum cabinet posts, including minister of 
defence and minister of security. The M5- 
RFP received little. 

The transition had not been going all 
that smoothly even before the latest coup. 
Frustration with the armed forces is grow- 
ing, as they not only dominate the govern- 
ment, but are colonising the rest of the 
State, too. For example, a military doctor 
was recently installed as head of one of Ba- 
mako’s largest hospitals. Meanwhile, pro- 
gress on reforms and preparations for elec- 
tions have been sluggish. In mid-May the 
main trade union went on strike. Under 
pressure from the M5-RFP for a fresh start, 
Mr Ouane’s government resigned on May 
14th. Mr Ndaw immediately reappointed 
him and consultations began to establisha 
more inclusive government, which was 
duly announced on May 24th. A few hours 
later the president and prime minister 
were detained. 

The changes to the government were 
not dramatic. The army retained control of 
the same number of ministries, including 
defence and security. But different men in 
uniform, not members of the junta, were 
put into those jobs. That seems to have pro- 


voked the arrival of soldiers at the houses >» 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


» of Messrs Ndaw and Ouane (who have 
since been released). President Emmanuel 
Macron of France, which has troops in Ma- 
li, called it “a coup d'état within a coup 
d’état”. Western countries threatened sanc- 
tions; America suspended security aid. 
Colonel Goita is now clearly in charge— 
and mainly looking out for the army. 

The leaders of the putsch may have 
been emboldened by the willingness of 
ECOWAS and Western countries to accept 
the government’s dubious civilian creden- 
tials. EcCowAS had called for a 12-month 
transitional period, but acquiesced to 18. 
The soldiers’ sense of impunity was proba- 
bly also fortified by the limp response from 
the African Union, which is supposed to 
have a “no coup” policy, to a coup last 
month in nearby Chad. Ignoring Chad’s 
constitution, Mahamat Idriss Déby took 
over after his father, the president, had 
been killed in battle. 

A French military spokesman called the 
events in Mali “a political episode” and 
said it would not affect French military op- 
erations against jihadists linked to al-Qae- 
da and Islamic State, who threaten swathes 
of Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger and Nigeria 
(see next story). France has 5,100 troops in 
the region. More than 13,000 UN peace- 
keepers patrol Mali itself. The EU has a 
large mission training the Malian army, 
too. Despite this, violence across the re- 
gion has been rising sharply since 2016. 
Last year the conflict in Mali, Burkina Faso 
and Niger claimed about 6,200 lives. 


A boon for the bad guys 

The turmoil in Bamako will not go unno- 
ticed among jihadists. Jama’at Nasr al-Is- 
lam wal Muslimin (JNIM), an al-Qaeda- 
linked group which operates across much 
of the Sahel, is not just a bunch of terror- 
ists. It also holds out the promise of a dif- 
ferent form of governance, says Yvan Gui- 
chaoua, an expert on the Sahel at the Uni- 
versity of Kent. The endless machinations 
in Bamako will, he says, benefit JNIM. 

With the Malian military leadership 
squabbling over power in the capital, “who 
is actually fighting on the ground?” asks 
Ornella Moderan of the Institute for Secu- 
rity Studies, a pan-African think-tank. In 
the chaos that ensued after an earlier coup, 
in 2012, separatists and jihadists swept to- 
wards Bamako, prompting France to inter- 
vene the following year. 

The 18-month transition period since 
the coup in August was meant to end with 
elections in February 2022. Confirming 
that schedule will be a priority for a delega- 
tion from ECowAS that came to Bamako in 
the wake of the latest coup. Colonel Goita 
himself claimed in his statement that 
those elections will go ahead as planned. 
But only the supremely credulous would 
believe a man who has staged two coups in 
nine months. # 


Abubakar Shekau 
Sixth time unlucky 


ABUJA 
Boko Haram’s vicious leader is dead. 
Probably 


NE CAN understand why Nigeria's gov- 
f Povmaad has been slow to confirm the 
death of Abubakar Shekau. It has an- 
nounced it five times before, between 2009 
and 2016. Each time Mr Shekau, the leader 
of Boko Haram, a jihadist group, turned up 
very much alive and ready to continue ter- 
rorising his compatriots. The war between 
Boko Haram and modernity has left more 
than 30,000 people dead and 3.2m dis- 
placed across four countries. Mr Shekau 
made zany videos to taunt the government 
that failed to kill him. In them, he would 
wave a gun, chew on astick and let derision 
froth from his mouth (see picture). 

But this time it seems he is not coming 
back. On May 19th, according to trusted re- 
ports, Mr Shekau detonated an explosive 
vest to avoid capture by Islamic State West 
Africa Province (ISWAP), a splinter group 
that was attacking Boko Haram’s strong- 
hold in Borno State in north-east Nigeria. 
His death marks the end of a bloody career. 
It also reflects the shifting power dynamics 
among west Africa’s jihadists. 

The son of a local imam, Mr Shekau was 
born in a remote village near the border 
with Niger, sometime between 1965 and 
1975. He left home as achild for Maiduguri, 
the capital of Borno State, where he was en- 
trusted to the care of an itinerant Koran 
teacher. AS a young man he met Muham- 
mad Yusuf, the founder in 2002 of the sect 
that became Boko Haram. When Yusuf was 
killed in police custody in 2009, Mr Shekau 
took the group underground. But it soon 
resurfaced as an army of zealots who at- 


The deadly departed 


Middle East & Africa 


tacked village leaders, schools, the police 
and government buildings. 

Vast swathes of Nigeria’s arid north- 
east fell under Boko Haram’s control. At- 
tacks extended to Niger, Chad and Camer- 
oon. Nigerian authorities say at least 
10,000 boys have been abducted by the 
group and rifles forced into their hands. In 
2014 the group won global notoriety by kid- 
napping some 276 schoolgirls in Chibok. 
Celebrities shared the slogan #BringBack- 
OurGirls. Mr Shekau said the girls had con- 
verted to Islam—or would be sold into slav- 
ery. He became the most wanted African in 
the world, with a $7m bounty on his head. 

Yet it was his fellow jihadists, not boun- 
ty hunters, who laid him low. In 2015 he 
crushed a breakaway faction and pledged 
allegiance to Islamic State (IS). But IS, 
based out of the Middle East, came to view 
Mr Shekau’s relentless killing of civilians 
and use of child suicide-bombers as 
counter-productive. It first tried to replace 
him. When that failed, in 2016, ISWAP 
broke away from Boko Haram. 

It has the same stated goals: the cre- 
ation of an Islamic state in northern Nige- 
ria and the eradication of “Western influ- 
ence”. But it prefers taxing civilians to 
murdering them, and tends to focus its at- 
tacks on military targets rather than 
schoolgirls. In 2018 it called Mr Shekau a 
“tumour” that needed removing. 

It is unclear whether ISwAP intended to 
kill Mr Shekau. Regardless, his death will 
have knock-on effects. ISWAP will probably 
absorb hundreds of Boko Haram fighters, 
making iteven more ofa threat to the Nige- 
rian armed forces, which are reeling from 
the death ina plane crash on May 21st of the 
army commander. 

Mr Shekau’s demise also bolsters Is’s 
claim that, although it has lost ground in 
the Middle East, its affiliates in Africa, 
whether in the Sahel, Congo, Mozambique 
or Nigeria, are in the ascendant. A jihadist 
is most likely dead. His cause endures. @ 





43 


The Economist May 29th 2021 





oe 


j 





Belarus and Russia 


rb 
y, 


An ever deeper union 


Having hijacked a Ryanair plane, Belarus has only one friend to turn to 


ELARUSIAN DISSIDENTS expect to be ar- 
Brestea in Belarus. But until May 23rd 
they thought they were safe in the West. 
That was when Roman Protasevich, a 26- 
year-old Belarusian journalist and activist, 
boarded a Ryanair jet that was due to fly 
from one EU country (Greece) to another 
(Lithuania). To his horror and the world’s 
astonishment, Belarus’s autocratic govern- 
ment hijacked it. 

The plane was passing through Belaru- 
Sian airspace and about to cross into Lithu- 
ania, where Mr Protasevich had been living 
in exile. Suddenly, the pilots were told 
there was a bomb on board. A MiG-29 fight- 
er jet was scrambled to intercept the plane 
and escort it to Minsk, Belarus’s capital, 
though this was not the nearest airport. On 
arrival Mr Protasevich was arrested, along 
with his Russian girlfriend, Sofia Sapega. 

No bomb was found. The alert was 
plainly a ploy. Alexander Lukashenko, 
Belarus’s dictator, has been rattled by mass 
protests against his theft of an election last 
year. Mr Protasevich co-founded Nexta 
(““someone’ in Belarusian), an internet 
channel that covered, galvanised and in 


part organised those protests. He now fac- 
es a 15-year jail sentence. In a video “con- 
fession” Mr Protasevich, with a bruise on 
his forehead and part of his neck apparent- 
ly covered by make-up, said he was being 
treated fairly. A similarly distressing video 
was aired of Ms Sapega, who is now being 
charged with instigating “mass disorder”. 
Western governments competed to ex- 
press their fury. The Eu’s leaders demand- 
ed the release of the two young people, 


— FR4978 flight path 
from Athens 


RUSSIA 


Moscow 
| 


(eee 
SWEDEN 
ESTONIA 


oO 
& 
Re LATVIA 
> 


LITHUANIA 


| Vilnius” 
Kaliningrad 
(Russia) 


Minsk 
me 
BELARUS 
POLAND 
UKRAINE 


300 km 
i 


| EU members 




















> Also in this section 
45 Russia's Czech problem 
46 ATurkish mobster speaks out 


46 Preserving Norwegian folk music 














47 The geography of Paris voting 


48 Charlemagne: Europe's lucky farmers 


closed European airports to Belarus’s state 
airline and advised their own carriers to 
avoid its airspace. So did Britain. The most 
politically significant step came from 
neighbouring Ukraine, which banned the 
import of electricity from Belarus, placing 
itself squarely in the Western camp. 
Britain, the EU and America are now 
working on new economic sanctions 
against Mr Lukashenko’s regime. Belaru- 
Sian opposition leaders who live in exile, 
as those who are not in prison tend to, say 
it should include a boycott of Belarusian 
potash and petrochemicals, the country’s 
main exports, as well as many more travel 
bans and asset freezes on named individ- 
uals and state-controlled entities. Getting 
27 EU members to agree on lists is likely to 
take time. But if Western leaders once held 
back because they reasoned that such 
moves would push Belarus closer to Rus- 
Sia, Mr Lukashenko’s actions have made 
their concerns less salient: his outrages 
have locked him firmly into Russia’s orbit. 
The Kremlin is delighted. Margarita Si- 
monyan, the boss of RT, Russia’s state pro- 
paganda channel, praised Mr Lukashen- 
ko’s piratical skills: “Never thought I would 
be jealous of Belarus. But now! am jealous. 
The old man has done it beautifully.” Rus- 
Sian Tv channels disseminated the Belaru- 
Sian dictator’s lies about the bomb threat 
having come from Hamas, which the Eu 
designates as a Palestinian terrorist group. 
Sergei Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, 
provided the rationale. “Russia will never 


leave Belarus in trouble...and will always b> 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


>» come to the rescue of our neighbour and 
Strategic ally. We have common history 
and spiritual values.” 

The main commonality between the 
two regimes, however, is a fear of popular 
uprisings that might drive both from pow- 
er. Last Summer, as protests engulfed Bela- 
rus, it seemed that another “colour revolu- 
tion” in a former Soviet state might topple 
another dictator. Vladimir Putin, who dis- 
approves of such things, stepped in, offer- 
ing economic help and pledging to provide 
security cadres to prop up Mr Lukashen- 
ko’s forces in case they wobbled. He also 
dispatched a team of Russians to take over 
parts of the Belarusian propaganda mach- 
ine if necessary. The aim was not to em- 
power Mr Lukashenko, whom he distrusts, 
but to secure his grip on Belarus, which he 
Sees aS an essential battleground in his 
confrontation with the West. 

For years Mr Lukashenko had cleverly 
played Russia against the West, blackmail- 
ing both to extract money. When Mr Putin 
pushed for a deeper union between Russia 
and Belarus two years ago, so that he could 
preside over anew empire, Mr Lukashenko 
resisted, taking on the unlikely role of 
champion of Belarusian independence. 
But by stealing the election and then order- 
ing the mass arrests, mass beatings and 
mass torture of those who objected, he has 
destroyed the last speck of legitimacy he 
had at home and alienated the foreign 
powers that had previously tolerated him. 
Now he has only one possible ally left, a ju- 
do enthusiast in Moscow. 

The melding together of Russia and a 
once-reluctant Belarus continues. Mr Pu- 
tin met Mr Lukashenko on April 22nd and 
praised progress in deepening the “union 
State” between the two countries. A few 
days earlier, Russia's FSB, the security ser- 
vice that now plays adominant role in Rus- 
Sian politics, said it had co-operated with 
the Belarusian KGB (as it is still called) to 
uncover a Western plot to assassinate Mr 
Lukashenko. Whichever country came up 
with this conspiracy theory, Mr Putin cited 
it last month in a telephone conversation 
with Joe Biden, whom he is to meet in Ge- 
neva on June 16th. 

In Belarus the plot was instantly turned 
into a propaganda film, “To Kill the Presi- 
dent”. In the words of Nikolai Karpenkov, 
one of Mr Lukashenko’s generals, it “clearly 
showed that this soft, kind opposition 
fighting for peaceful changes are in fact 
bloody-minded dogs preparing a military 
coup, murder and kidnapping.” The Bela- 
rusian security services claimed they were, 
in fact, fighting terror, rather than propa- 
gating it: “We are ready to act. As soon as 
the order comes, we will find and purge 
them...we will make the world freer.” Hi- 
jacking the Ryanair flight to arrest Mr Pro- 
tasevich was part of the “counter-terrorist” 
operation that stems from this deepening 


collaboration with Russia, and was per- 
haps also intended to secure Belarus finan- 
cial assistance in the event of harsher sanc- 
tions; a cynical deal indeed. 

Belarus is testing new limits to what 
Freedom House, an American NGO, calls 
“transnational repression”. Authoritarian 
regimes such as those in Russia, China and 
Rwanda have long targeted domestic dissi- 
dents beyond their borders. Some will now 
be tempted to copy Mr Lukashenko’s novel 
tactics. Exiled dissidents of every national- 
ity will be more nervous about boarding 
planes. Belarusian dissidents will wonder 
if they are safe flying over Russia, which is 
much harder to avoid than their home- 
land. When Mr Biden meets Mr Putin in 
three weeks’ time, the democrat and the 
despot will have even more to discuss. @ 


Central Europe 


The spirit of ’68 


Russia puts the Czech Republic on an 
official enemies list 


NLIKE TEENAGERS, countries rarely 

write down lists of their enemies. But 
Russia does. On May 14th it published a list 
of “unfriendly countries”. Oddly, it had on- 
ly two names on it: the United States and 
the Czech Republic. The latter was unex- 
pected, but explicable. In April the Czech 
government revealed that a deadly explo- 
sion in 2014 atan ammunition depot in the 
town of Vrbetice, previously thought acci- 
dental, was set off by Russian agents. 
(Some of the ammunition was destined for 
Ukrainian forces fighting Russian-backed 
rebels.) The Czechs and Russians have 


7 - 


Not a friendly act 





Europe 45 


since expelled dozens of each others’ dip- 
lomats. Relations are now as sour as at any 
time since the Soviet Union collapsed 
(though not as bad as in 1968, when Mos- 
cow’s tanks rolled into Czechoslovakia to 
overthrow a reformist government). 

That is inconvenient for the Kremlin. It 
needs friends inside the EU to stave off fur- 
ther sanctions over its latest misdeeds. Al- 
though most Czechs distrust Russia, it has 
long been able to count on the Czech presi- 
dent, Milos Zeman, a cantankerous popu- 
list who likes to set off explosions of a rhe- 
torical kind. Mr Zeman questioned his own 
country’s intelligence agencies for blam- 
ing the blast on Russia. During a visit by 
Serbia's president on May 18th he abruptly 
begged forgiveness for NATO’S bombard- 
ment of Belgrade in 1999, clearly trying to 
suggest that the Russians are not the only 
ones who go around blowing things up. 

Mr Zeman also called Russia’s enemy 
list “silly”, and his powers as president are 
limited. But the government of Prime Min- 
ister Andrej Babis is hanging by a thread. 
The Czech Communist Party, an unre- 
formed Russia-friendly outfit that has 8% 
of the seats in parliament, stopped backing 
the coalition in April, depriving it of its 
majority. If Mr Babis falls, Mr Zeman could 
decide who will run a caretaker govern- 
ment until an election in October. 

The biggest consequence of the feud in- 
volves an upgrade to the nuclear power 
plant at Dukovany, originally built by the 
Soviet Union. The state power company 
plans to build at least one new reactor by 
2036 for €6bn ($7.3bn), though analysts 
fear the cost may be twice as high. After the 
Vrbetice affair the government announced 
that Rosatom, the Russian nuclear consor- 
tium, had been excluded from bidding. 

However, experts say that Russian com- 
panies have only been kicked out of the 
initial phase, and could end up winning 
contracts later. Having built Dukovany, 
they have an advantage over their compet- 
itors, France’s EDF, South Korea’s KHNP 
and the Japanese-American firm Westing- 
house. “If you ask Czech engineers, they 
mostly say they would be for the Russians,” 
says Martin Jirusek, an energy industry ex- 
pert at Masaryk University. 

Czech views of Russia have often see- 
sawed. Last spring the two countries tus- 
Sled over the removal of a statue of a Soviet 
general, Marshal Konev, hailed for liberat- 
ing the country from the Nazis in 1945 but 
then reviled for planning the invasion in 
1968. But views of the West can be wary as 
well. A survey in 2020 by CvvM, a pollster, 
found that by a two-to-one margin Czechs 
are glad that their country is a NATO mem- 
ber, but they are split almost evenly on 
whether that is a guarantee of indepen- 
dence or a form of subjugation to foreign 
powers. Enemies list or no, some Czechs 
are still reluctant to take sides. @ 


46 Europe 


Turkey 


The untouchables 


ISTANBUL 
A convicted mobster’s allegations rock 
the government 


EDAT PEKER, the man at the centre of 
Sone of Turkey’s biggest political scan- 
dals for many years, makes an unlikely 
YouTube celebrity. He slurs his words, pos- 
sibly as a result of too many Botox injec- 
tions, wears an unbuttoned shirt, and sits 
behind a desk adorned with prayer beads, 
pages of notes and an empty lantern. Over 
the past month, however, Mr Peker, a con- 
victed mobster, has had millions of Turks 
glued to their screens as he has settled 
scores with President Recep Tayyip Erdo- 
gan's government. 

His allegations, which are unproven, 
are explosive. In a series of videos, Mr Pek- 
er has accused the son of Mr Erdogan’s for- 
mer prime minister of drug trafficking and 
a ruling-party MP of involvement in the 
death of ayoung woman. He claims to have 
had another politician beaten up for in- 
sulting the president and takes credit for 
an attack on the offices of one of the coun- 
trys biggest newspapers. He also claims 
the country’s interior minister, Suleyman 
Soylu, offered him police protection. 

The seven videos have been viewed at 
least 55m times. More of them seem to be 
on the way. Opposition politicians and 
even some members of the ruling Justice 
and Development (AK) party have called for 
an inquiry. What the allegations show, said 
Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the leader of the main 
opposition party, is that the mafia has be- 
come the government’s coalition partner. 
“If even a thousandth of these claims are 
true, this is a disaster,” said Cemil Cicek, an 
AK heavyweight. 

Mr Soylu, meanwhile, denies the allega- 
tions. He has swatted away calls for his res- 
ignation, demanded that Mr Peker should 
be charged with slander and dared him to 
return home. He also called the allegations 
part of “an international operation” and ac- 
cused America and the United Arab Emir- 
ates (UAE) of attempting to overthrow Tur- 
key’s government. Mr Peker, who fled Tur- 
key two years ago, is believed to be living in 
the UAE. 

Mr Soylu has not been helping his 
cause. Late on May 24th acrowd of suppor- 
ters swarmed around the minister outside 
a television station, breaking curfew rules 
Mr Soylu had personally signed into law. 
He warmly thanked them. 

The scandal has revived memories of 
the 1990s, when the state regularly teamed 
up with criminal groups to go after oppo- 
nents, from journalists to Kurdish leaders. 








The Economist May 29th 2021 





Fiddlers of the fjords 


Norwegian folk music is worth preserving, says the UN 


ETESDAL, A WINDING valley to the 
S north of Kristiansand in southern 
Norway, was once a place of traditions 
little changed since medieval times. 
Chief among these were song and dance 
marked by improvisation and a beat as 
visceral as the blues. Birth, death and 
every step in between happened to mu- 
sic. But over the years radio, Tv and then 
the internet wormed their way into its 
hamlets. Now only a handful of stalwarts 
know the old tunes and dances. Fearing 
that they might disappear, UNESCO, the 
UN'S culture agency, gave Setesdala 
listing at the end of 2019. 

A UN convention on safeguarding 
“intangible cultural heritage’, agreed in 
2003, requires states to act to preserve 
whatever is listed within their juris- 
diction within six years. “For us, this was 
an alarm bell,’ says Annbjorg Lien, who 
has the job of reviving folk traditions in 
the Setesdal municipality. 


Scores were killed. Some of that era’s unsa- 
voury characters have now resurfaced, in 
part thanks to an amnesty last year. 

Until recently, Mr Peker had been in the 
government's good graces. The mobster, 
who has served time for leading a crime 
syndicate, extortion and kidnapping, met 
Mr Erdogan on at least one occasion, or- 
ganised rallies in support of him, and 
earned an award as Turkey’s “most bene- 
volent businessman”. When a group of aca- 
demics penned a letter criticising a gov- 
ernment offensive against Kurdish insur- 
gents, Mr Peker swore to “shower in their 
blood”. He fell out of favour, he claims, 
when Mr Erdogan’s son-in-law turned 


Setesdolen, the local newspaper, has 
Started printing stever, four-line ditties 
sung in acall-and-response fashion. 
These are common at weddings and 
other celebrations. Ms Lien says there is 
now talk of permitting them in local- 
council business. This would certainly 
liven up dull planning-committee meet- 
ings. From this autumn schools will 
incorporate traditional music and dance 
into the curriculum, and those who teach 
these skills will earn good wages. 

The children seem keen. Given the 
electronica-like pulse of a typical Setes- 
dal session, it’s easy to see why. But their 
enthusiasm, and that of the wider pop- 
ulation, may also reflect a craving for 
community, especially after the tor- 
ments of lockdown. “People want to 
know who they are, where they're from, 
what they’re about. Only a soulful experi- 
ence can provide that insight,’ says Ms 


| Lien, a keen fiddler herself. 


against him. 

The videos are also embarrassing Tur- 
key’s media and judiciary, which no longer 
dare to look into high-level corruption or 
probe top officials, much less members of 
Mr Erdogan’s family. A reporter for Tur- 
key’s state news agency who asked a minis- 
ter a pointed question about Mr Peker’s 
claims lost his job the next day. The biggest 
previous corruption scandal in the Erdo- 
gan era was largely the work of bureaucrats 
loyal to a religious sect, who dug up evi- 
dence of bribery and money-laundering by 
government ministers. Today, the task of 
holding the powerful to account seems to 
have fallen toa mafioso. 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Greater Paris 


Beyond the fringe 


LA CHAPELLE-EN-VEXIN AND MARINES 


Why Paris is so disconnected from its semi-rural outer rim 


UTTING THROUGH farmland in a re- 
C gional nature park, the approach to La 
Chapelle-en-Vexin is dominated not by its 
12th-century chapel but by newly built 
two-storey homes. With their dormer win- 
dows, sloping tiled roofs and neatly 
hedged gardens, houses on such lotisse- 
ments offer a French version of American 
suburban life: play space for children, a 
deck for the barbecue, and—crucially—off- 
street parking. In this village of just 333 in- 
habitants, an off-plan three-bedroom 
house with a garage is on sale for €260,000 
($320,000)—the same as a gloomy bedsit 
in central Paris. 

Only 65km (40 miles) separate La Cha- 
pelle-en-Vexin from the cobbled boule- 
vards of the French capital. Both belong to 
the greater Paris region, Ile-de-France. Yet 
daily concerns could not be more different. 

The suburban RER express line does not 
reach this far. Fully 85% of residents drive 
to work. Villagers worry about pollution. A 
big local issue is an effort to get a bypass 
built to divert heavy traffic from driving 
through the centre. But roads sustain daily 
life. Shopping is done by car at a hyper- 
market. Nobody in the village uses a bicy- 
cle to get to work. “We don't feel close to 
Paris at all,’ says Joélle Valenchon, the 
mayor: “We are a bit forgotten.” 

The French capital, with 2.2m people, is 
dwarfed by its region, home to12.2m. Some 
3m-4m of them live on its semi-rural edg- 
es. Such places, where 87% of trips are 
made by car, feel a world away from the 
capital’s concerns. Politics in Paris, gov- 
erned by Anne Hidalgo, a Socialist backed 
by the Greens, is increasingly about bike- 
Sharing, pedestrianisation, the végétalisa- 
tion (greening) of concrete spaces and roof- 
top micro-farming. Paris aspires to bea “15- 
minute city”, a concept developed by Car- 
los Moreno, an urban planner. The idea is 
that everything—school, work, shops, 
sport, cafes—should be within 15 minutes 
from home on foot, or five minutes by bike. 
“Mine is actually more like a two-minute 
city,’ says a Paris city-dweller, who rents an 
electric bike for more distant excursions. 

The disconnect between Paris and the 
outer reaches of its region has political im- 
plications. One is that Ms Hidalgo, who is 
seen as an anti-car crusader and could run 
for the French presidency next year, may 
find it hard to appeal far beyond the péri- 
pherique. The Paris ring-road, built half a 
century ago, has turned into a gigantic con- 


crete symbol of the capital’s division from 
its suburbs. Life on the lotissements on the 
region’s outer fringe has more in common 
with the villages and towns across France 
than it does with central Paris. 

Divergent geographical interests also 
help explain why efforts over the years to 
merge the overlapping and competing ad- 
ministrative structures governing Paris 
and the region have come to little. As it is, 
the capital seems quite happy not to run 
the troubled banlieues, with their brutalist 
housing estates, which ring Paris itself. 
The semi-rural communes are more ne- 
glected still. “For 30 years the capital’s 
growth has benefited the nearer suburbs, 
but it has also reinforced the contrast with 
the outer periphery,’ says Aurélien Delpi- 
rou, of the Ecole d’Urbanisme de Paris. 


The other Marine 
The fringes of greater Paris carry a political 
warning too. At elections to the European 
Parliament in 2019, the Greens’ vote was 
concentrated in central Paris. A big swathe 
of the outer fringe, however, voted for Ma- 
rine Le Pen’s populist National Rally. Stud- 
ies by Hervé Le Bras, a geographer, show 
that the National Rally’s vote tends to rise 
with distance from a railway station. Isola- 
tion and fear of crime play a part, as does a 
sense that government ignores rural vot- 
ers’ problems. At regional elections next 
month, the National Rally’s candidate, Jor- 
dan Bardella, is Ms Le Pen’s young deputy. 
The campaign for the [le-de-France cap- 
tures the rift between Paris and its region. 


Eure-et-Loir 


Loiret 
20km 





Europe 47 


Valérie Pécresse, the sitting centre-right re- 
gional president, is the favourite. All can- 
didates with more than10% gothroughtoa 
run-off, where she may face both Mr Bar- 
della and a candidate on the left, possibly 
the Greens’ Julien Bayou (the candidate of 
President Emmanuel Macron is polling 
fourth). Ms Pécresse, who moved the re- 
gion’s headquarters from Paris to the sub- 
urbs, has distanced herself from Parisian 
politicians. She opposes the pedestrianisa- 
tion of parts of central Paris, as it has 
pushed congestion and pollution out to 
the periphery. The fashionably bearded Mr 
Bayou, meanwhile, got into trouble last 
month for posters aimed at young voters, 
which hinted that “hunters” and “boom- 
ers” were not interested in climate change. 

Greenery is at the heart of this tension, 
and competing interests are complex. In 
Marines, a small town with a cobbled cen- 
tral square, residents cherish the environ- 
ment as well as their cars. Daniel Her- 
mand, who works at the town hall, says he 
quit Paris for a calmer life close to nature 
and forests. If the pandemic and conse- 
quent home-working push more families 
out, they may bring their hobbies and poli- 
tics with them. So Ms Pécresse has taken 
care to sound eco-friendly too. She has 
launched an electric-bike rental scheme, 
and promises a network of bicycle routes 
to match those of the RER train lines. 

“Of course it’s good for people to use bi- 
cycles,’ says Othman Nasrou, Ms Pé- 
cresse’s deputy. “But environmental policy 
can't be to the detriment of those who need 
to use their cars.” Mr Macron learned this 
the hard way when gilets jaunes (yellow 
jackets) launched huge protests against a 
rise in tax on motor fuel. It is not fashion- 
able politics to listen to car owners, nor to 
the quiet concerns of those on the fringes. 
But the lotissements of greater Paris and 
their voting habits suggest that policy- 
makers who unthinkingly punish the car- 
dependent do so at their peril. @ 


se 
FRANCE 


Marne 


European Parliament 
‘| election results 
2019, by commune 


~ La République 
en Marche 
® National Rally 
» Greens 
Others 
Source: French 
Interior Ministry 





Yonne 


48 Europe 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Charlemagne | How farmers rule Europe 


Politicians are still afraid to touch their exorbitant privileges 


a LEREUBAT: 


TIT —- 
MUL 


[Ss ee ee EE EEE 


ae 
aT 
as 
ae* 
= 
--T 
at 
~ 
= 


| 


elidel > 


RMED WITH a device designed for throwing tennis balls for 

dogs, itis possible to launch an egg avery satisfying 60 metres. 
Head to the Quartier Leopold in Brussels on the right day and you 
can see farmers from across Europe firing a wide range of produce 
an impressive distance at Belgian riot police. It is during these reg- 
ular protests at the European Union's headquarters that the inge- 
nuity, bravery and diligence of the European farmer truly shows it- 
self. In one episode a pair of tractors slowly drove through a 
barbed-wire barricade, as cops scattered. When an armoured po- 
lice van turned up, the farmers drove into that too. It took two wa- 
ter cannons at full blast to make the tractors retreat. Over the 
years, grumpy farmers have covered stoic Belgian riot police in 
hay, eggs, and milk direct from the udder. 

A riot can be the voice of the unheard. It can also be a tantrum 
of the ludicrously privileged. European farmers are politically 
powerful in the same way that the sky is blue: it is a fact so univer- 
sally acknowledged that it is usually not worth mentioning. This 
poweI was apparent this week in the final negotiations between 
diplomats, members of the European Parliament and officials ov- 
er the terms under which farmers will receive €270bn ($330bn) in 
2023-27. That the farmers will get the cash is a given. The debate is 
about how many conditions will be attached, with the options 
ranging from nota lot to very few indeed. 

The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is a tumour in the EU’s 
body politic. Sucking up a third of the group’s budget, itis a neat il- 
lustration of its struggle to change itself for the better. What began 
six decades ago as a quid pro quo between France and Germany 
(farming bungs in exchange for market access) is still in place. It is 
an odd form of redistribution. About 20% of farms get 80% of the 
money. Aristocrats, agri-giants and the Catholic church all take a 
juicy cut. Companies linked to Andrej Babis, the billionaire Czech 
prime minister, got €34m ($42m) one year. Money is shifted from 
European taxpayers to landowners, in a frankly feudal farce. Usu- 
ally, there is a pretence that things will improve. This time, the 
European Commission has given up. “We have to acknowledge 
that there will be no revolution in the CAP,” said Frans Timmer- 
mans, the commissioner tasked with making Europe greener. 

History is littered with once-mighty interest groups that have 





withered. Coalminers in Germany and Poland will have cash 
thrown at them as their industries are phased out as part of the 
plan fora “just transition” toa green economy. But this amounts to 
a free bar at a wake. By contrast, farmers remain as powerful as ev- 
er. Partly this is down to the nature of food. People care more about 
what they put in their mouths than how they heat their homes or 
the bodywork of their Audis. Unlike coal or steel, food is not truly 
fungible. An Italian may spurn a tomato from Spain, never mind 
one flown in from Morocco, or a genetically modified American 
one. For a continent without a common tongue, snobbery about 
domestic produce provides a universal language. 

The way the Eu cooks up agricultural policy helps farmers keep 
their outsized power. Normally, policymaking in Brussels is a ba- 
Zaar, with everything for sale at the right price. Officials from 
countries haggle with each other, surrendering on one topic to get 
what they want on another file. As a system it is opaque, but it 
works. By contrast, farming is insulated from the other subjects of 
haggling, sealed off in its own special committee. The result is that 
governments try to grab as much cash as they can, rather than 
question whether it should be there in the first place. 

For all the talk of the EU’s democratic deficit, agriculture is an 
area where the EU suffers from a surplus of democracy. Dead-eyed 
technocrats would happily chop farming subsidies. European pol- 
iticians will not let them. In France any self-respecting presiden- 
tial candidate must spend time sniffing cheese at agricultural 
fairs. Farming generates barely 1% of European GDP. But its fate 
has outsized importance. Rather than left or right, the political 
battleground across much of Europe is a fight between urban cen- 
tres and the rural periphery. Britain’s exit removed one of the few 
big governments that was less neuralgic about the future of farm- 
ing (as its current enthusiasm for free-trade deals with agricultur- 
al powerhouses like Australia attests). For most of the EU, slashing 
subsidies would be an assault on a politically potent rural hinter- 
land. It is a fight few want to have. 


Farmers versus Swedish teenagers 

Luckily, some do. Greta Thunberg, a young Swedish climate activ- 
ist, has joined a cabal of NGos hammering the EU for not doing 
enough to curb agriculture’s environmental effects. At the mo- 
ment, whatever ambition the Eu has for climate policy melts away 
when it comes to farming, even though its emissions rival much 
heavier industries. Farmers can no longer brush off the concern. 
Environmental policy has gone from the hobby-horse of sandal- 
wearers to an existential policy debate. From now on, the farmers 
will have a fight on their hands. Things can get better. After all, the 
CAP used to be even worse. The days when European taxpayers 
paid to overproduce products that were then dumped on poor 
countries are over. But it took years of concerted campaigning to 
shift the butter mountains and the wine lakes. 

It is too late to make a difference this time, as talks over the 
€270bn come to aclose. A slow grinding fight led by the likes of Ms 
Thunberg is necessary if the CAP is to be overhauled. Ensuring that 
farmers do their bit for the climate, and stopping the transfer of 
cash to those who do not need it would be a start. The story of 
European policymaking is one of path dependency in which er- 
rors take years (and usually a big crisis) to unpick. Until then, the 
CAP will remain a scar on the EU, a visible reminder of how hard it 
is to undo past mistakes. Should it ever look like being fixed, 
though, it will be wise to avoid the EU quarter in Brussels. Imagine 
how grumpy the farmers will be if they actually lose for once. @ 


Britain 


The Economist May 29th 2021 








The BBC 


A colossus quietly crumbles 


The corporation can cope with a hostile government and angry royals, 


but not with Mickey Mouse 


ELATIONS BETWEEN the British Broad- 
R casting Corporation and the govern- 
ment have always been delicate. Stanley 
Baldwin bridled at the BBc’s coverage of the 
General Strike of 1926. Margaret Thatcher 
was infuriated by its reporting from the 
Falklands. Hugh Carleton Greene, the cor- 
poration’s boss in the 1960s, confessed 
that, when dealing with Harold Wilson’s 
government, “I found my experience as 
head of psychological warfare in Malaya in 
1947 extremely useful.” 

The latest spat pits the BBC against not 
just Downing Street but the royal family, as 
well as many viewers. An independent in- 
quiry released on May 2oth found that one 
of its most famous scoops, an interview in 
1995 in which Princess Diana claimed that 
“there were three of us in this marriage”, 
was secured partly by deception. Martin 
Bashir, the interviewer, forged documents 
to persuade the princess that she was being 
spied on. A BBC probe at the time led by To- 
ny Hall, who later became director-gener- 
al, covered it up. 

The BBC promises a review of its edito- 
tial practices and another report into its 
dealings with Mr Bashir, who left the cor- 


poration earlier this month citing ill- 
health. Two former executives, including 
Lord Hall, have quit their new jobs. Prince 
William declared the revelations proof that 
the interview “established a false narra- 
tive” about his mother. The government is 
drawing broader lessons. Oliver Dowden, 
the culture secretary, wrote in the Rupert 
Murdoch-owned Times newspaper that the 
BBC needed “a new emphasis on accuracy, 


Ss 
A lot to take in 
Britain, viewing per day by method, April 2020, % 


@ TV and recorded playback ' Broadcaster VoD* 
» Subscription VoD* ® YouTube 
™@ Games console Other 


Daily minutes 386 


12.4 4.900 


Daily minutes 382 


22,3 11.3 45 


*Video on demand 


All 
55./ 3.1-—81e 


16- to 34-year-olds 


2775 31-9 Bi 


Source: Ofcom 





> Also in this section 
50 Free-trade deals 


52 Bagehot: Mr Levelling Up 


Read more from this week’s Britain section: 
Economist.com/Britain 


impartiality and diversity of opinion”. To 
avoid “groupthink’, he said, “cultural 
change must bea focus’. 

Conservative politicians have long sus- 
pected the BBc of closet liberal leanings. 
Boris Johnson’s government uses the 
“Brexit-Bashing Corporation” as a punch- 
bag, as part of a strategy of drawing cultural 
dividing lines rather than economic ones. 
But the real danger posed by political skir- 
mishes such as that over Mr Bashir is one 
of distraction. The more the BBC focuses 
on government assaults, the less it is able 
to cope with bigger threats emanating 
mostly from America. 

More than six out of ten British homes 
now subscribe to an American video- 
streaming service. The result is more com- 
petition for eyeballs. In the past decade 
Britons have gone from watching four 
hours a day of broadcast television to just 
under three. Among under-35s, broadcast 
TV accounts for less than a third of video 
viewing (see chart). 

The BBC is good at new media. Its web- 
site is Britain’s fourth-most visited after 
Google, YouTube and Facebook. The 
iPlayer streaming service, which the BBC 
launched in 2007 (the same year Netflix be- 
gan streaming) is used by more people in 
Britain than any subscription platform. It 
is not enough. In 2019 under-35s spent less 
than an hour a day consuming BBC output, 
across television, radio and the internet, 
down by 17 minutes in just two years. 

The compulsory licence fee through 
which it is funded is not cheap: at £159 


($225) ayear, it would be enough fora basic >> 


50. —=sC#Brritain 


» subscription to both Netflix and Disney+, 
with money left over for popcorn. But the 
BBC is limited to about 25m fee-paying 
households and cannot borrow. Streaming 
companies have the world to fish in—Net- 
flix has over 200m subscribers, Disney+ 
100m—and are willing to lose money for 
years in the pursuit of market share. 
Whereas the BBC commissioned £2.8bn of 
content in 2020, Netflix and Disney+ have 
a combined budget this year of more than 
$20bn. Amazon recently earmarked nearly 
half a billion dollars for a single “Lord of 
the Rings” series. 

Commercial media outfits are rushing 
to bulk up. WarnerMedia, creator of “Game 
of Thrones”, “Harry Potter” and other hits, 
has announced plans to merge with Dis- 
covery. France’s largest and third-largest 
channels, TFi and M6, will also try to 
merge, to provide une réponse francaise to 
the Americans. The BBc has teamed up 
with ITv, Britain’s biggest commercial 
broadcaster, to run BritBox, an interna- 
tional streaming service. With 2.6m sub- 
scribers it is a minnow. 


The last stronghold 

No big streamer does news, an area where 
the BBC remains strong. Last year 70% of 
Britons with internet access said they had 
absorbed its reports in one medium or an- 
other during the past week, according to 
the Reuters Institute at Oxford University; 
among 18- to 24-year-olds the figure was 
51%. This represents a drop since 2015, 
when 79% of all adults and 68% of young 
people tuned in. But the BBC remains “un- 
doubtedly, and by a massive margin” the 
main source of news in Britain, says Ras- 
mus Nielsen of the Reuters Institute. 

The corporation is at least stronger than 
other national broadcasters, which have 
seen similar declines in reach. Fully 86% of 
Britons say they are satisfied with their 
public-service media, versus between 50% 
and 61% of French, German, Spanish and 
Italian viewers. For all his complaining 
about the BBC, “Boris is intelligent enough 
to see that shutting it down would back- 
fire,” Says one senior Tory. The elderly, who 
make up the core of the Conservative vote, 
remain BBC addicts. And Mr Johnson's 
healthy poll ratings mean he owes no fa- 
vours to Mr Murdoch, who has long lob- 
bied for the corporation to be trimmed. 

Still, as the variety of entertainment 
from streamers grows, a compulsory levy 
to fund comedy, drama and the like looks 
odd. In the age of linear viewing, public- 
service broadcasters had to combine news 
with lighter fare to get people to tune in. 
The on-demand era has decoupled the two, 
making it harder to argue that everyone 
should pay for “Strictly Come Dancing”. Ex- 
pect a smaller, newsier BBC in future—and 
direct the blame, or credit, not to Westmin- 
ster but to Hollywood. m 


Free-trade deals 


Trussed but verify 


Rows over a trade deal with Australia 
show a need for greater transparency 


ABINET SPLITS always excite Westmin- 
Coter So it proved after the Financial 
Times reported a bust-up between Liz 
Truss, the trade secretary, and George Eus- 
tice, the environment secretary, over a 
planned free-trade deal with Australia. At 
issue was Ms Truss’s desire to offer Austra- 
lian beef-producers unlimited tariff- and 
quota-free access to the British market, up- 
setting Mr Eustice’s farmers. Minette Bat- 
ters, president of the National Farmers’ 
Union, said such an agreement would 
throw British family farms “under a bus”. 
Boris Johnson eventually came down on 
Ms Truss’s side after invoking the free- 
trade heritage of another Conservative 
prime minister, Robert Peel. 

The prime minister is right to have 
done so. Brexit has created an opportunity 
to escape the European Union’s costly sys- 
tem of farm protection (see Charlemagne) 
and to strike more adventurous trade deals 
with third countries. The Australians in- 
sisted on far more generous access for beef 
and lamb as the price of any agreement. 
And, as Ms Truss asked rhetorically: if Brit- 
ain cannot strike a free-trade deal with an 
old friend like Australia, who can it do 
deals with? 

For all the noisy opposition of farmers 
(especially in Northern Ireland, Scotland 
and Wales) the quantities involved are 
small. Ms Truss’s trade department esti- 
mates that the entire deal with Australia 
would add a maximum of just 0.02% to 
GDP in the long term. Last year Britain im- 





Power steering 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


ported some 560 tonnes of beef and veal 
from Australia. Were that number to rise 
tenfold, as Australian producers hope, it 
would still be less than 3% of more than 
200,000 tonnes imported from the EU 
each year. Ms Truss also promises a 15-year 
transition before tariffs and quotas are lift- 
ed in full. A more justifiable fear for British 
farmers, suggests Sam Lowe of the Centre 
for European Reform, a think-tank, is that 
the deal becomes a model for bigger future 
ones with Latin America and the United 
States. Yet such deals are far off and could 
be debated on their merits. 

The argument has revealed the absence 
of a trade strategy. Brexiteers say they want 
free trade everywhere. Yet they remain 
shtum about the barriers erected with Brit- 
ain’s biggest trading partner, the EU. Al- 
most all the trade deals done by Ms Truss so 
far have been rollovers of those formerly in 
place through Britain’s EU membership. 
Australia would be the first significant new 
one. But why is the focus of such deals so 
much on farming (or in some cases fish), 
which are tiny shares of a GDP that is 80% 
composed of services? How is Britain going 
to lead the charge towards greater liberal- 
isation of services trade around the world? 

Indeed, argues David Henig of ECIPE, a 
think-tank focused on trade, it seems as if 
the only post-Brexit strategy is to sign free- 
trade deals as quickly as possible. That fos- 
ters a sense of desperation, which puts 
Britain in a weak bargaining position 
against some of the world’s toughest nego- 
tiators. The latest deal appears to be of 
greater benefit to Australia than it is to Brit- 
ain. Just wait for the battle that is likely 
with the Americans, who take no prisoners 
in trade talks. 

That points to another concern over the 
deal: the lack of transparency in negotiat- 
ing it. Public support for free trade is often 
fragile, because producers who lose out 
shout louder than consumers who gain. 
Protests from special interests, greens and 
others have often sunk free-trade negotia- 
tions, ranging from Seattle in 1999 through 
Doha in 2008 to a planned transatlantic 
trade and investment partnership in 2016. 
Yet the British government conducts its 
negotiations, including those affecting 
controversial food-safety standards, large- 
ly in secret. Parliamentary scrutiny is al- 
lowed only after trade deals are signed. 

The risk of this triggering a popular 
backlash against freer trade is all the great- 
er because of the government's reputation. 
Ms Batters’s adverse reaction to the Austra- 
lian trade deal was so strong partly because 
she claims that Mr Johnson promised he 
would die rather than sell farmers down 
the river in order to secure trade deals. She 
is not the first, and will not be the last, to 
discover that the prime minister has a hab- 
it of making promises that he does not in- 
tend to keep. 





EVENTS 








Sustainability Week US, June 8th-11th 2021 


How the US Is preparing fora 
new era of sustainable investing 


Join policymakers, investors, and academics for robust debate 


(3) 


Rajiv Shah 
President 
i Xolel <==) 1 (1am ele later-hate)a' 


Kathleen McLaughlin 
Chief sustainability officer 
Walmart 





Gina Bocra 
Chief sustainability officer 


Katherine Neebe 
Chief sustainability officer 





Duke Energy NYC Department of Buildings 
‘- Register free 
weit” SuStainabilityweekus.economist.com 





Platinum sponsor Gold sponsors Silver sponsors Tech demo sponsors 


BAYER Ainteros  s€brPes.er ROBECO efripple novisto 
R 





52 


Britain 


Bagehot | Mr Levelling Up 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Neil O’Brien tries to make sense of the government's signature philosophy 








VER SINCE he stood on the steps of Downing Street the day after 

his 2019 election triumph and promised to “unite and level up” 
the country, Boris Johnson has been tormented by the question of 
what “levelling up” means. What exactly is being “levelled up’— 
individual opportunities or entire regions? How can anybody tell 
if it is happening? Isn't “levelling up” from Westminster and 
Whitehall a contradiction in terms? It is “a slogan without a pur- 
pose’, one Downing Street insider recently complained. 

Lost in the recent fuss about Carrie Symonds’s over-the-top 
wallpaper and Dominic Cummings’s acid reflux is the fact that Mr 
Johnson is at last attempting to make sense of levelling up. He has 
appointed a new adviser on the subject and given him the job of 
producing a “landmark” white paper later this year. Mr Levelling 
Up will head a small team in the Cabinet Office and work closely 
with Michael Gove, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancasteranda 
fount of ideas about rebalancing the country, and Sir Michael Bar- 
ber, a former adviser to Tony Blair. 

It would be tempting to dismiss this as just another empty ges- 
ture were it not for the man who has been appointed to do the job. 
Neil O’Brien is as close to the perfect candidate as you could get. 
He has been thinking about the subject for years, knows his way 
around the corridors of Westminster, Whitehall and, toa lesser ex- 
tent, local government, and manages to be both optimistic and re- 
alistic. If anybody in today’s Tory party deserves to inherit David 
(now Lord) Willetts’s old title of “two brains”, itis Mr O’Brien. 

When he received his last big promotion, to co-chairman of the 
Conservative Party’s internal think-tank, the Policy Board, the 
Yorkshire News described him as “a previously obscure MP whom 
even political obsessives would have struggled to identify”. In fact 
he has been a big figure within the Tory political machine for 
years. He directed the Policy Exchange think-tank and was a spe- 
cial adviser to George Osborne (as chancellor) from 2012 to 2016 
and then to Theresa May (as prime minister). He has been MP for 
Harborough in the Midlands since 2017. 

He gets on well with all factions in the party. He voted to leave 
the EU in 2016 and co-founded the hawkish China Research Group, 
but also keeps in touch with his old boss and panda-hugger, Mr 
Osborne. He believes that the Tories should fight harder to contain 


the “woke revolution rolling through western institutions”. But he 
has also fought a feisty Twitter war against professional culture- 
watriors such as James Delingpole who have tried to extend the 
war on woke to a war on masks and lockdowns. 

Mr O'Brien started thinking about “levelling up” when the rest 
of his party was obsessed with Notting Hill Man and Woman. In 
2014 he wrote a paper, “Northern Lights”, arguing that the Tories 
should venture beyond their southern comfort zone. In his years 
with Mr Osborne he was involved with the Northern Powerhouse 
project. Since becoming an MP he has formed a Levelling Up Task- 
force with 40 others and has written a column for the Conserva- 
tive Home website in which he often returns to the subject. 

His fascination is rooted in personal experience. During his 
formative years he was surrounded by reminders of fading north- 
ern might. His parents were from Glasgow, one of the industrial 
engines of the British empire; he grew up in Huddersfield, a for- 
mer Victorian boom town; and his brother moved to Liverpool, 
Britain’s leading example of economic decline. 

Even the talented Mr O’Brien will struggle to make sense of his 
new portfolio. The prime minister wants him to think about the 
subject in the broadest possible terms. It is not just about promot- 
ing economic development in Britain’s poorer regions or spread- 
ing opportunities more evenly, but also about tackling inequal- 
ities in the provision of public services (particularly education, 
transport and law and order) and improving “pride in place” by 
sprucing up high streets and civic buildings. The job could easily 
spiral out of control or fall between the cracks in Whitehall. It is 
notable that other successful examples of driving change from 
Downing Street, such as Mr Blair’s education reforms, have fo- 
cused on one department. 

Moreover, Mr O’Brien’s most innovative ideas don’t mesh well 
with the orthodoxy in his party and in the Treasury. He believes in 
the power of manufacturing (“the view that manufacturing is a 
relic of the past is itself a relic of the past”). Manufacturing pro- 
vides a larger proportion of the better-paid and more productive 
jobs in Britain’s poorer areas than in its richer ones: in the north- 
east the median wage in manufacturing is 22% higher than the av- 
erage, for example. He is also a fan of the state’s ability to encour- 
age innovation, citing the example of the Asian tigers, which have 
avoided many of Britain’s destabilising inequalities, and calls for 
more investment in the “pb” rather than just the “R” side of re- 
search and development. It is easy to imagine Treasury officials 
blocking, diluting and otherwise subverting any such policies. 


Our friend in the south 

Yet Mr O’Brien will not be an easy man to sandbag. He knows his 
subject better than the Treasury mandarins or the party stick-in- 
the-muds: read him in Conservative Home debating precisely how 
to measure household income or running through the demogra- 
phy of the party’s new seats in the north. He has lots of levers to 
pull, from special grants (such as the Towns Fund and the Level- 
ling Up Fund) to business funds. Many of his long-term passions, 
such as increasing infrastructure spending, raising capital allow- 
ances and shifting resources from the bloated university sector to 
the under-funded vocational sector are now mainstream in his 
party. And much levelling up can be achieved not by spending 
more but by stopping giving preferential treatment to the south- 
east, as Britain does in spending on research, transport infrastruc- 
ture and housing. At the very least, the government’s “slogan with- 
out a purpose” is now a slogan with a powerful champion. & 


Thesaarieelarl 

















Where covid-19 came from 


Looking again 


NEW YORK 


How can the world prepare for a future pandemic when it does not know 
for sure where the current one came from? 


N MARCH, President Joe Biden asked his 
[ spooks how the covid-19 pandemic had 
Started. Contradicting claims made last 
year by Donald Trump, who said the intelli- 
gence services had shown him very strong 
evidence on the matter, they told him that 
that they did not know. So on May 26th he 
asked them again, publicly this time, ad- 
monishing them to try harder and to report 
back in 90 days. 

This is a direct rebuke to China's secre- 
tive government. When experts convened 
by the World Health Organisation (WHO) 
travelled to Wuhan, the city where covid-19 
was first identified, in January and Febru- 
ary this year their hosts refused to share 
crucial data. A senior Biden administration 
official said recently that he found those 
efforts to “undermine serious investiga- 
tions” into the pandemic’s beginnings par- 
ticularly troubling, and that they left “ma- 
ny more questions than answers’. 

At the crux of this distrust is the pos- 
sibility that SARS-cov-2, the virus which 
causes covid-19, may have emerged acci- 
dentally from research on animal corona- 


viruses conducted at the Wuhan Institute 
of Virology (wIv) or another nearby lab. In 
early 2020 this idea, sometimes conflated 
with the idea that the virus had been devel- 
oped as a biological weapon, was publicly 
dismissed by eminent scientists. In Febru- 
ary 2020 a number of them used the pages 
of the Lancet, a medical journal, “to strong- 
ly condemn conspiracy theories suggest- 
ing that covid-19 does not have a natural 
origin”. Most in the media followed their 
line. By far the most plausible account of 
covid-19’s origins, they reported, was “zoo- 
notic spillover’—that is, a virus jumping 
unaided from animals to humans, as is tak- 
en to have been the case for SARS, a disease 
caused by a different coronavirus, in 2002. 
Lab-leak theories were widely dismissed as 
conspiracy-mongering. 

In the past few months, though, discus- 
sion of lab-leakery has gained currency 


> Also in this section 


54 Thelikelihood of alaboratory origin 


The Economist May 29th 2021 








among politicians and policy elites and in 
the mainstream media, as well as in influ- 
ential blog posts by science reporters. This 
is in part because of the departures of Mr 
Trump and Mike Pompeo, his secretary of 
state, who promoted the theory with gusto. 
To be able to consider the possibility with- 
out giving them succour will have made it 
easier for some. 

But the resurgence is nota purely politi- 
cal phenomenon. On May 13th Science, a 
journal, published a letter from a group of 
senior scientists who had not previously 
weighed in on the matter arguing that “the- 
ories of accidental release from a lab and 
zoonotic spillover both remain viable”. In 
this they were taking the same position as 
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO's 
boss, who refused to rule out the pos- 
sibility of a laboratory origin after the WHO 
mission in January and February was 
stonewalled, and has since called for fur- 
ther inquiry (see following story). 

This is not going down well in China. 
On May 21st, at a Global Health Summit 
convened by the Eu and G20, Xi Jinping, 
China’s president, urged world leaders to 
“firmly reject any attempt to politicise” the 
covid-19 pandemic. On May 25th China’s 
representative at the World Health Assem- 
bly, the WHO’s decision-making body, said 
the country considered the inquiry into 
the origins complete and that the focus 
Should shift to other countries, strongly 
suggesting that it would not accommodate 
further investigation. 


54 International 


High on the assembly's agenda were re- 
sponses to the current pandemic and the 
prevention of future ones. Felicity Harvey, 
chair of an oversight committee for the 
WHO's Health Emergencies Programme, 
said that new virus threats must in future 
be handled with more transparency, better 
data-sharing and an ability to give infor- 
mal early warnings to the world. Earlier in 
May a WHO panel of experts recommended 
that countries be placed under a greater ob- 
ligation to report new outbreaks and that 
the WHO’s authority to seek out and share 
relevant information with the world be 
strengthened. 

It would be surprising if China (and, in- 
deed, some other countries) were to accept 
all these ideas. Its leadership has consis- 
tently fought to deny international bodies 
the right to stick their noses into the affairs 
of sovereign countries, and it does not al- 
ways welcome the WHo’s attentions. In 
2018 it declined requests from American 
officials, made under WHO guidelines, for 
lab samples of the H7N¢9 Strain of avian flu. 

China has instead recently indicated it 
will reform its own public-health system. 
On May 13th the authorities announced a 
reorganisation of the national public- 
health bureaucracy under a new entity, the 
National Administration of Disease Pre- 
vention and Control. A priority in the 
shake-up is to improve top-down control, 
so that lower-level officials have more in- 
centive to report new public-health threats 
up the chain of command. 

Chinese authorities tried to deal witha 
similar issue after the SARS outbreak of the 
2000S, in part to tackle the problem that 
national health officials were outranked by 
provincial authorities who had covered up 
the early spread of that coronavirus in 
southern China. They made the monitor- 
ing of new threats more systematic, raised 
their game with the WHO and even co-oper- 
ated with America’s Centres for Disease 
Control and Prevention, the model for Chi- 
na’s own cpc—the Wuhan office of which 
is now being mentioned in the context ofa 
possible laboratory origin. 

There is as yet no evidence in the public 
domain that a laboratory leak actually took 
place; just evidence that the possibility is 
real. Mr Biden’s request suggests anything 
the secret world can currently add to that is 
pretty weak stuff. His statement says that, 
at present, two “elements” within the in- 
telligence community lean towards the 
zoonotic explanation, one prefers the lab- 
oratory origin, and no one has high confi- 
dence in any of these assessments. With- 
out help from China, a harder look will not 
necessarily change this. But it is still worth 
taking, even given the risk of a confronta- 
tional response which will make the en- 
hanced transparency and co-operation 
talked about at the World Health Assembly 
unlikely to blossom any time soon. & 


The lab-leak hypothesis 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Possible, but far from proven 


The theory that SARS-Cov-2 originated in a laboratory is gaining adherents, but it 
has yet to find evidence beyond the circumstantial 


T IS POSSIBLE that the chain of infections 
[which Spread SARS-COV-2 around the 
world began, like most new diseases do, 
when an animal virus found its way unaid- 
ed into humans, whether in field or farm, 
cave or market. It is also possible that the 
chain began in a Chinese government lab- 
oratory. These two possibilities have been 
recognised by many of those studying the 
covid-1i9 pandemic for a long time. But the 
fact that two things are both possible does 
not mean they are equally likely. 

For most of 2020 scientists and the me- 
dia tended to treat the likelihood of a leak 
from a lab as a very small one, with every- 
day contact—“zoonotic spillover’—over- 
whelmingly more probable. That has now 
changed. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, 
director-general of the World Health Orga- 
nisation, said in March that assessment of 
the laboratory hypothesis had not yet been 
extensive enough. On May 26th President 
Joe Biden ordered America’s intelligence 
agencies, which have not as yet reached a 
conclusion either way on the subject, to go 
away and try harder (see previous story). 


The escape artists 

The place most strongly tied to the emer- 
gence of SARS-Cov-2 is a fish and animal 
market in the Chinese city of Wuhan. Chi- 
na’s wildlife markets and the trade which 
supplies them with their civets, rats, pan- 
golins and badgers are viral melting pots 
brimming with opportunities for zoonotic 
spillover. In the 2010s a study in Vietnam 
showed that animals acquire coronavirus- 


es from each other as they make the jour- 
ney to restaurant or market; there is no rea- 
son to think Chinese supply chains more 
Salubrious. In February last year China an- 
nounced a ban on wildlife consumption 
and trade in recognition of the risks in- 
volved. It was a big step, and a costly one. 

The first flutterings of lab-leak concern 
were prompted by simple geography. That 
market is just 12km away from the Wuhan 
Institute of Virology (WIv), a global centre 
for coronavirus research. The Wuhan Cen- 
tre for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC), which also worked on bat corona- 
viruses, is closer still: a mere 500 metres. A 
worker or workers in one of these labs 
could have been infected with a coronavi- 
rus being used in research, thus providing 
that virus with passage to the outside 
world. A related idea is that the virus came 
directly from a bat, or another animal, ei- 
ther inside alab or as part of research-asso- 
ciated field work. An avid collector of wild 
bat viruses works for the CDC. 

If one of these possibilities were to 
prove true it would be deeply and disturb- 
ingly ironic. Ever since the outbreak of 
SARS, a respiratory disease caused by an- 
other coronavirus, in the early 2000s, co- 
ronaviruses have been seen as having a 
wotrying propensity for pandemics. That 
is what made them of particular interest to 
the researchers in Wuhan; their work on 
coronaviruses was carried out in the name 
of reducing the threat they posed. 

Pathogens escape from _ institutions 
working on them with depressing frequen- >> 





The Economist May 29th 2021 


»cy. The last known death from smallpox 
was the result of a laboratory leak in Britain 
1n 1978. SARS-COv-1, the virus which causes 
SARS, escaped from labs twice as it spread 
round the world in 2003, once in Singapore 
and once in Taiwan; it leaked out of a Be!- 
jing lab on two separate occasions in 2004. 
In December 2019 more than 100 students 
and staff at two agricultural research cen- 
tres in Lanzhou were struck with an out- 
break of brucellosis, a bacterial disease 
usually caught from livestock. 

Most alarmingly, the H1N1 strain of in- 
fluenza which started spreading around 
the world in 1977 is now known to have 
been released from a north-east Asian 
lab—possibly in China, possibly in Russia. 
Some Western observers suspected this at 
the time, but they made little fuss about it, 
perhaps afraid that doing so would lead to 
China and/or Russia pulling out of interna- 
tional flu-surveillance efforts, or spark a 
backlash against virology. 

Biosecurity at the WIV was known to be 
spotty. American diplomats who visited it 
in 2018 reportedly flagged issues of con- 
cern, making specific mention of corona- 
viruses and pandemic risk. In February 
2020 the Chinese ministry of science and 
technology issued new rules requiring lab- 
oratories to improve their biosafety, indi- 
cating unease with the status quo. 


Charles Darwin, detective 

The idea of a laboratory leak was apparent- 
ly not unthinkable to those involved. 
When Shi Zhengli, a coronavirus research- 
er who is the director of the wIv’s Centre 
for Emerging Infectious Diseases was in- 
terviewed for Scientific American in early 
2020, she said one of her first concerns was 
whether the virus could have come from 
her own lab. After searching records of all 
the viral sequences that they had worked 
with, she concluded it had not. Yet the Chi- 
nese government has rarely been hesitant 
to suppress any information that does not 
suit it, and Dr Shi may not be able to say 
otherwise. It is also possible that the virus 
came from work outside her purview. 

Dr Shi’s group at the wiv has spent years 
trying to understand mutations that would 
allow bat viruses to spill over into human 
populations. In the pursuit of such ques- 
tions they conducted research designed to 
make coronaviruses more infectious to 
humans. In work published in 2015 they re- 
ported a chimera created from a bat coro- 
navirus and a mouse coronavirus that was 
able to replicate efficiently in human air- 
way cells. 

Some proponents of the lab theory have 
speculated about what other animals the 
laboratory might have used in this work. 
They point out that the virus looks very 
much like across between a pangolin virus 
and a bat virus with an additional genetic 
sequence that makes the virus far more in- 





fectious to humans. This “furin cleavage 
site” is not found in other closely related 
viruses; perhaps it was put there, they say. 

There are various counterarguments to 
the specifics of these speculations. There 
is also a more overarching caveat based on 
the insights of Charles Darwin: natural se- 
lection can come up with all sorts of 
subtleties which look like irrefutable evi- 
dence for intelligent design to those who 
Start off believing in a designer. 

What of evidence from the spread of the 
disease? According to the Guardian, a Brit- 
ish newspaper, when the WHO sent scien- 
tist Peter Ben Embarek to China in July 
2020 his subsequent report to the agency 
stated that the Chinese had done “little...in 
terms of epidemiological investigations 
around Wuhan since January 2020”. Some 
infer that China is not looking because it 
knows, or perhaps just fears, the answer. 

That lack of zeal adds to lab-leak suspi- 
cions. One of the reasons offered for the in- 
creased interest in such ideas is that only 
limited further evidence for zoonotic spill- 
over has come to light; no one has found 
anything close to a “smoking bat”. When 
the lab-leak story seems to have momen- 
tum and the zoonotic story appears to just 
sit there it is natural for people to get the 
feeling that the lab hypothesis is becoming 
more likely. But itis not strictly logical. Itis 
also important to remember that the rela- 
tively quick progress made on the origin of 
SARS in 2003 is not necessarily a reliable 
guide to how fast such sleuthing normally 
gets results. 

While some data are absent, others are 
simply not being shared. During the WHO 
visit early this year the Chinese authorities 
refused requests to provide key epidemio- 
logical data on the 174 earliest known cases 
of covid-19 in the city in December 2019. 

These data are crucial. Not all the early 
cases of covid-19 were from the market. 
Rather than being the source of the out- 
break, it could simply have been a place 


International 


where the virus was amplified. That speaks 
to the need to look at other possible sourc- 
es, and that requires individualised data 
on every early case. The lack of such data 
meant that the WHO team was unable to do 
a standard epidemiological investigation, 
Dominic Dwyer, an Australian microbiolo- 
gist, told the Wall Street Journal at the time. 
These early cases of covid-19 could point 
clearly in the direction of either an animal 
or laboratory source. 

Excitement about the latter possibility 
has been stoked by the re-emergence of 
claims that three workers from the wIv got 
sick with something a bit covid-like in No- 
vember 2019, claims first aired by the state 
department in the dying days of the Trump 
administration. But these reports lack cor- 
roboration, sources or details of where in 
the lab the people involved actually 
worked. That means they do nothing to 
move the story along. 

The evidence to date shows that the cir- 
cumstantial assumptions on which the 
idea is based—that there was coronavirus 
research and that it could have leaked—are 
true; it does not provide direct insight into 
the outbreak proper. As Ralph Baric, an 
American researcher who helped set up the 
WIV's coronavirus work, told the Wall Street 
Journal, “more investigation and transpa- 
rency are needed to define the origin’; he 
himself continues to see zoonotic spill- 
over as the more likely possibility. 

Ideally, China would help such investi- 
gations unearth new evidence. That can 
hardly be counted on. It is possible that the 
dogged work of America’s intelligence ser- 
vices may turn up compelling arguments 
for or against regardless, or that the many 
Scientists poring over details of the virus’s 
genome and structure may come up with 
something. But there is no guarantee that 
the question will be solved soon. 


Was it worth it? 

For observers such as Filippa Lentzos, a 
biosecurity expert at King’s College Lon- 
don, the uncertainty underlines the need 
for more discussion about the risks that 
the world is willing to take in the name of 
science. More facilities for pathogen re- 
Search are being built around the world, 
and even the most sophisticated biosecur- 
ity measures may sometimes leak. 

That means the research needs to be 
carried out in ways that allow scrutiny and 
accountability, that the knowledge sought 
needs to be worth the risks, and that that 
knowledge, once gained, should be used 
and made useful. There is no compelling 
evidence that the presence of the wIv in 
the city where the covid-19 pandemic be- 
gan was anything other than a coinci- 
dence. But neither is there evidence that 
the WIV’s coronavirus research, justified in 
the name of pandemic preparedness, did 
anything to lessen this pandemic’s toll. m 


35 










ER WE ARE WORKING 


"ts 


Kemet -) 7a = BETTER WORLD 
FOR CHILDREN LIKE BABY LOBO. 






raw ce) ace Ke) exe) aa] ex-b3-1(e) a0 uf 


A world where all children are \ 
i at-)micwel0) mm ale) oX-MeaValeme)alivmcote(-1nal-ve 
or- TaN 


Wroyiam y<-co) (od-x-6 PL: mkem at=y| OM Ul continue 


elUiirehiatemaar-imuolaremcolar-limevalilela-ia 


Learn more about Baby Lobo’s story 
and donate today: www.rednoseday.org 





The little Engine that could 


NEW YORK 


ExxonMobil’s defeat by green investors is just the beginning 


(47FHE STONE AGE did not end for lack of 

f rans and the oil age will end long 
before the world runs out of petroleum.” 
That battle cry animates critics of Big Oil, 
who dream of phasing out hydrocarbons in 
favour of cleaner fuels and technologies. 
Their béte noire is ExxonMobil, long the 
richest and mightiest of Western oil super- 
majors—and the most unrepentant in its 
defence of crude. Lee Raymond, a formida- 
ble former boss of the Texan titan, once 
told your correspondent to get out of his 
office after being challenged over his fla- 
grant denial of climate science. 

Darren Woods, who currently does Mr 
Raymond's old job, does not deny that cli- 
mate change is real. And he must now con- 
tend with the biggest rebuke to the firm’s 
Management in living memory. At his 
company’s shareholder meeting on May 
26th a coalition of activist investors led by 
Engine No.1, a small hedge fund, managed 
to put at least two green-tinged directors 


on the board to promote a lower-carbon 
Strategy of the sort espoused by European 
Supermajors such as BP, Royal Dutch Shell 
and Total. As The Economist went to press 
the fate of a third activist nominee had yet 
to be determined. 

Engine No.1 didn’t quite get its way: it 
had put forward four candidates. But as Da- 
vid Larcker of Stanford’s Graduate School 
of Business observes, it is “extremely rare” 
for a company the size of ExxonMobil to 


59 Chinas great logistics race 

59 Chinese tech’s online binge 

60 Arare DAX mega-merger 

60 Refloating the cruise industry 

61 Bartleby: Why you need more breaks 


62 Schumpeter: Strategic U-turns 


elect even one dissident director, let alone 
two or three. Even one dissenting voice can 
make a big difference, says Charles Elson, a 
corporate-governance expert at the Uni- 
versity of Delaware who has served as a 
courteous rebel on various boards. The re- 
sult is thus an unprecedented attack on 
ExxonMobil’s carbon-addiction, which is 
greater than any other supermajor’s (see 
chart1on next page). 

The campaign succeeded thanks to the 
backing of powerful allies. CalPERS and 
CalsTRS, pension funds representing, re- 
spectively, California’s public employees 
and its teachers, have between them over 
$700bn in assets under management. Two 
giant funds representing New York’s state 
and city employees, with another $300bn 
or So in assets, joined them in supporting 
Engine No.1s effort. Together they hold 
less than 1% of ExxonMobil’s shares. But as 
large asset managers, their actions sent a 
strong signal to the broader market. 

The market received it. Institutional 
Shareholder Services (Iss) and Glass Lewis, 
a proxy-advisory duopoly which counsels 
investors on such matters, recommended 
the election of three and two of Engine 
No.1’s directors, respectively. In a report 
published on May 14th Iss declared that the 
hedge fund “made a compelling case that 
additional board change is needed to pro- 
vide shareholders with sufficient confi- | 


57 


58 Business 


» dence” in ExxonMobil's prospects. The ma- 
jority of shareholders agreed, almost cer- 
tainly including some big asset managers. 

The vote itself was as odd as the result. 
ExxonMobil’s management refused to an- 
nounce the results, which should already 
have been tabulated, at the scheduled 
hour, instead declaring a recess “to ensure 
all of our shareholders have the opportuni- 
ty to express their views”. This unusual 
move fuelled rumours that the firm was 
trying to persuade large institutional in- 
vestors to reverse votes cast for the dissi- 
dent directors, especially those with the 
greenest profiles. If true, that would be a 
departure from ExxonMobil’s habitually 
strong corporate governance. 

Whatever actually went on during the 
unscheduled break, the result was still a 
bombshell. When the meeting resumed, 
the firm announced that two of Engine 
No.1 candidates, Gregory Goff and Kaisa 
Hietala, had been elected. It said it needed 
more time to determine whether a third, 
Alexander Karsner, would join them. 

ExxonMobil’s proxy defeat is the latest 
sign that outside pressure for the oil busi- 
ness to embrace the transition to a low-car- 
bon future is mounting. On May 18th the 
International Energy Agency (IEA), an in- 
ternational forecaster not known for 
alarmism, warned that investments in all 
new fossil-fuel projects must stop now if 
the global energy sector is to achieve car- 
bon neutrality by 2050. President Joe Biden 
wants America’s power sector to stop add- 
ing greenhouse gases to the atmosphere 15 
years earlier than that. 

So far it has been Europe’s oil giants that 
were pushed harder to go greener—by ac- 
tivists, consumers, regulators, investors 
and courts. Last year BP vowed to slash the 
carbon intensity of the products it sells by 
50% in the next 30 years. This month Shell 
won shareholder approval for its plan to 
create a carbon-neutral business by mid- 
century, including emissions from the fuel 
burned by end-users. Though ambitious 
by industry standards, this was not enough 
for a judge in the Netherlands, who on May 


=a 
In need of a low-carb diet 
Oil majors, greenhouse-gas emissions, tonnes, m 


Total emissions from operations 
150 


| | ExxonMobil 
™ 120 
Gas 60 


0 
— 


ASO, OH) USMS WN ee [ey 20 


Source: Bloomberg 


= 
Texas hold ‘em, but for how long? 


ExxonMobil, % 
a 40 


, Return on capital FORECAST " 






20 

10 

Weighted-average 0 
cost of capital* 

-10 


2001 05 10 15 A HLS 


Sources: ExxonMobil; JPMorgan Chase; Engine No. 1; Refinitiv Datastream 


26th ordered the Anglo-Dutch giant to cut 
emissions between 2019 and 2030 by 45%, 
in keeping with global climate accords; 
Shell is expected to appeal. 

Now carbon-bashing is spreading be- 
yond tree-hugging Europe. Earlier this year 
activist badgering had already prompted 
ExxonMobil to unveil plans for a new “low 
carbon solutions” division, which will de- 
velop technologies to capture carbon and 
Store it underground. It has also pledged to 
cut the carbon intensity of its own explora- 
tion and production operations by 15-20% 
by 2025. The same day as the ExxonMobil 
vote, shareholders of Chevron, its Ameri- 
can rival similarly bullish on oil, voted for 
a proposal to reduce emissions from the 
end use of its products. 

ExxonMobil’s new directors will now 
push for more aggressive emissions cuts. 
Engine No.1 points to the firm’s plans to 
spend merely $3bn or so in total over the 
next five years on its low-carbon effort, 
compared with around $20bn a year on 
dirtier traditional investments. Unlike 
Shell, the company has promised only to 
reduce emissions from its own operations, 
not the vastly greater ones produced when 
its products are used by consumers. 

The big reason such arguments no lon- 
ger fall on deaf ears is ExxonMobil’s once 
mighty reputation for being tightly run has 


Emissions including end-use of fossil fuel 
2020 or latest available 


0 200 400 600 800 


ExxonMobil 
Shell 
Chevron 


BP 





Total 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Oil majors, total returns, Jan 1st 2020=100 
120 


100 






60 


4Q 
Brent crude 0 


2020 2021 
*Estimated from debt and equity 


slipped. Indiscipline has replaced histori- 
cally prudent capital spending. The firm 
has torched billions in shareholder value 
in the past few years. The most eye-pop- 
ping chart in Engine No.1’s 80-page mani- 
festo shows its return on capital languish- 
ing at or well below its weighted-average 
cost of capital since 2015 (see chart 2). 

Whereas Chevron spent less than 
$70bn on capital expenditure in total over 
the past five years, ExxonMobil splurged 
nearly $100bn, even as oil prices swooned. 
Its net debt has nearly doubled since 2015 
to over $6o0bn. A mistimed and overpriced 
acquisition of xTo Energy, a gas firm, led it 
in November to write off $17bn-20bn—and 
S&P Global, a rating agency, to entitle a 
scathing analysis of the incident “How not 
to do M&A”. “Board refreshment is neces- 
sary due to the long-term financial under- 
performance at ExxonMobil,’ says Anne 
Simpson of CalPERS. 

Last summer, as ExxonMobil’s share 
price headed to a two-decade low and the 
company was knocked out of the Dow 
Jones Industrial Average after nearly a cen- 
tury in the blue-chip index, Ms Simpson’s 
argument would have sounded incontro- 
vertible. To many it remains compelling. 
But deep down many investors may still 
worry that the green shift will destroy 
Shareholder value. Thanks to dearer oil 
ExxonMobil has clawed back $nobn in 
market capitalisation since October, hand- 
ily besting the European giants whose 
promised wind and solar projects are years 
away from profitability and could mean- 
while eat into their dividends. 

Crude prices are, of course, cyclical by 
nature. They will fall again at some point, 
in contrast to the carbon dioxide relent- 
lessly accumulating in the air as more oil is 
burned. Mainstream investors now view 
climate risk as “a core component of long- 
term value”, notes Timothy Youmans of 
EOS, which offers stewardship services to 
owners of $1.5trn in assets and supports 
Engine No.1. This week’s shareholder battle 
is proof of that. Mr Woods and his succes- 
sors should brace for more such fights. @ 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


E-commerce logistics 


Formula races 


HONG KONG 
When it comes to delivery, Chinese 
tech titans take divergent routes 


N 2019 RICHARD LIU told couriers work- 
Ling for JD.com that the Chinese e-com- 
merce giant he founded would cancel their 
base pay after a 2.8bn yuan ($438m) loss 
the previous year, its 12th consecutive one 
in the red. Riders would make only a com- 
mission on deliveries. If the company did 
not cut back on spending, Mr Liu warned, it 
would go bust in two years. 

Far from collapsing, two years on JD Lo- 
gistics, JD.com’s delivery division, is ona 
roll, fuelled by a boom in Chinese e-com- 
merce (see chart). Its parent company’s 
revenues jumped by 39%, year on year, in 
the first quarter, to 203bn yuan. On May 
26th Pinduoduo, an upstart rival that also 
offers customers delivery by JD Logistics 
couriers, reported quarterly sales of 22bn 
yuan, 239% higher than a year ago. 

The State Post Bureau expects logistics 
companies to deliver more than 100bn par- 
cels this year, twice aS many as in 2018. 
Overall spending on logistics in China is 
projected to hit 16trn yuan in 2021 and sur- 
pass 19trn yuan by 2025. That would make 
it the world’s largest market. The logistics 
business has also avoided the worst of the 
crackdown against Chinese big tech, which 
has seen firms such as Alibaba and Tencent 
(which owns a large stake in JD.com) taken 
to task by the Communist authorities over 
their growing power. 

Domestic and foreign investors have 
been pouring money into the industry, say 
lawyers working on deals involving such 
businesses. JD Logistics has attracted in- 
vestments from big private-equity groups 
such as Sequoia China and Hillhouse Cap- 
ital. The market buzz around the firm is as 
frenetic as the pace at which its 190,000 
workers fulfil and ferry orders. On May 21st 
it raised $3.2bn in Hong Kong’s second- 
largest initial public offering this year. Its 
Shares are scheduled to begin trading on 
May 28th. The company’s backers are bet- 
ting that its Amazon-like approach of cre- 
ating a fully integrated delivery network 
has more mileage than a similar offering 
from SF Express, a stodgier incumbent 
similar to FedEx, or a rival model champi- 
oned by Alibaba, which has plumped fora 
more distributed system. 

JD Logistics is the only large Chinese de- 
livery service to grow out of an e-com- 
merce parent. It became a separate entity 
from JD.com in 2017, in part so that it could 
take orders from other online retailers. It 
still delivers the bulk of JD.com’s packages 


but a large chunk of its revenues now 
comes from orders outside the group. By 
owning much of its technology, lorries and 
warehouses, and directly employing staff, 
the firm has been able to ensure faster de- 
livery times while monitoring quality. It 
operates China’s largest integrated logis- 
tics system, covering a good’s entire jour- 
ney and including a fully autonomous ful- 
filment centre in Shanghai and driverless 
vehicles. The system can also flip into re- 
verse, sending customer feedback to pro- 
duct designers that, JD Logistics claims, 
helps it produce better products and bol- 
ster brands. 

Contrast that with Cainiao, in which 
Alibaba has a controlling stake. It does not 
own many of the logistics assets in its net- 
work. Instead it allows around 3,000 logis- 
tics companies employing some 3m couri- 
ers to plug into its platform. Its aim is to in- 
tegrate and streamline the vast delivery re- 
sources that already exist across China, 
rather than build its own. The company 
has teamed up with most large logistics 


Splash the cash 
$bn 


Re-investible cashflow*, Q2 2020-01 2021 


5 0 5 WG 5 2 BS 
Alibaba 


JD.com 
Tencent 
Pinduoduo 


Meituan 





Research-and-development spending 


Alibaba ; 





Sources: Bloomberg; Bernstein; 
The Economist 


Money for something 


Business 


services—and taken investments from 
them as well. Alibaba, for its part, has 
bought minority stakes in several large op- 
erators as a means of exerting more influ- 
ence over the industry. Cainiao is not pub- 
licly listed and does not disclose many op- 
erational details or, for that matter, how ex- 
actly it makes money. 

In terms of revenues, both JD Logistics 
and Cainiao trail SF Express. Similarly toJD 
Logistics, that firm operates its own net- 
work. It still leads the market in “time-defi- 
nite” delivery, a service that requires couri- 
ers to pick up and drop off parcels on a rap- 
id, predetermined timetable. Like FedEx in 
America but unlike JD and Cainiao, it did 
not emerge from the tech industry, so lacks 
its rivals’ technological chops. 

Which model emerges victorious will 
ultimately depend on which best controls 
costs, thinks Eric Lin of UBS, a bank. JD Lo- 
gistics may have to lower prices further as 
it tries to get more business beyond 
jD.com. Analysts predict it could lose a 


59 


combined 12bn yuan over the next three b> 


Acquisitionst 









2 
® Tencent 10 
@ Alibaba 
@ |D.com 


® Meituan 


2020 


Sales-and-marketing spending 





Alibaba 


Pinduoduo 


Meituan 0 
2018 19 20 21 


*Gross profit plus net change in working capital, less administrative and R&D expenses 


TExcluding Pinduoduo which did not make any acquisitions 


Chinese tech giants, like those elsewhere, have thrived as covid-19 forced consumers to 
get their necessities and leisure online. This month Tencent, China's most valuable tech 
firm, reported another stellar set of earnings. Operating profit grew by 20% year on 
year in the first quarter, to $6.5bn. Rather than sit on this money (or fork it out to 
shareholders), it has pledged to ramp up investments in its business. It isn't alone. As 
they vie for users, China's tech titans are spending more on research and development. 
Even after those expenses and administrative costs, they are awash with re-investable 
cashflow. A slug goes on marketing. But expect more to flow into new services. 


60 Business 


> years, and turn a profit only in 2024. SF Ex- 
press is spending heavily to try to match 
JD's and Cainiao’s tech prowess. Its share 
price has fallen by around half since it is- 
sued a profit warning in April; it is expect- 
ed to record a net loss of at least 900m yuan 
in the first quarter. Jefferies, an investment 
bank, points to SF Express’s troubles as a 
clear sign of an ongoing price war. 

In the long run Cainiao’s asset-light 
model may enable it to keep spending in 
check. But for the time being it, too, is 
thought to be having trouble containing 
costs. Like its rivals it must fend off new 
Specialist competitors offering cut-price 
services in areas like cold-chain and last- 
mile delivery. Average delivery prices in 
America have increased by about 5% annu- 
ally in recent years, according to Bernstein, 
a broker. In China they have been falling at 
an average rate of 10% for the past decade. 
As China’s online shoppers get their goods 
ever more quickly, investors may need to 
brace for longer waiting times before their 
logistics returns finally arrive. & 


Property deals 


Second time lucky 


BERLIN 
A rare German mega-merger creates a 
giant landlord with political baggage 


OLF BUCH, chief executive of Vonovia, 

Germany's biggest residential-property 
company, says he has learned a lot since he 
tried and failed to buy Deutsche Wohnen 
(Dw), the second-biggest, in 2015. Back 
then Mr Buch’s hostile bid was an attempt 
to prevent Dw from combining with third- 
ranked LEG. Neither deal came to pass. 

On May 24th Vonovia said it is having 
another go, with the acquiescence of Dw’s 
management. “This time we will do better,” 
Mr Buch promises. If the €18bn ($22bn) all- 
cash deal wins the approval of Dw’s share- 
holders, it will create by far the biggest res- 
idential-property firm in Europe. 

The duo’s combined market capitalisa- 
tion is €45bn. The enlarged Vonovia will 
manage 550,000 flats in all big German cit- 
ies with a total value of some €9o0bn. Mr 
Buch and Dw’s boss, Michael Zahn, who 
will become his deputy, say it would save 
€105m annually in costs, thanks to cheaper 
sourcing of materials and other economies 
of scale, and free up money for investment 
in things like better insulation, helping to 
meet Vonovia’s goal of making all its build- 
ings virtually carbon-neutral by 2050. 

Mergers between members of the DAXx 
30 index of Germany’s bluest chips are 
rare—and mostly, like the takeover in 2001 
of Dresdner Bank by Allianz, a big insurer, 


ill-starred. They tend to be met with fierce 
opposition from unions, which appoint 
half the members of supervisory boards of 
listed companies with more than 2,000 
employees. Vonovia placated workers’ rep- 
resentatives with a promise of no job cuts 
at least until the end of 2023. 

Unions were not the main obstacle to 
this particular corporate tie-up, however. 
Although rumours of the takeover began 
circulating last year, to proceed it neededa 
favourable ruling by Germany’s constitu- 
tional court regarding an experiment with 
rent control in Germany’s capital, Mr Buch 
admits. In February 2020 Berlin’s local gov- 
ernment, run by a coalition of Social 
Democrats, Greens and Die Linke, a hard- 
left party, imposed a five-year rent cap. 
Since more than 110,000 of DW’s 160,0000 
flats are in Berlin, such a policy would per- 
manently hurt the value of its portfolio. 

Last month the court declared the rent 
controls unconstitutional. That removed 
the biggest hurdle to the deal. But there are 
others that Messrs Buch and Zahn must 
still overcome. For one thing, competition 
authorities are likely to take a close look, 
warns Marcel Fratzscher of the German 
Institute for Economic Research, a think- 
tank. Although the new behemoth would 
own only about 2.5% of German flats, the 
Share would be much higher in poorer 
neighbourhoods of big cities such as Ber- 
lin, Kiel and Leipzig. 

Even if regulators bless the deal, as 
seems likely, grassroots opposition will 
persist. A two-year-old campaign is gather- 
ing signatures to force a citywide referen- 
dum on September 26th, the day of federal 
elections, on whether to oblige firms that 
OWN 3,000 properties or more to sell them 
(at market rates) to the city, which could 
rent them out more cheaply. Messrs Buch 
and Zahn have tried to appease the cam- 
paigners by promising to Sell 20,000 flats 
in the city to the local government and 
boost the housing stock by building an- 
other 13,000 for sale to Berliners. They also 
promised to cap annual rent increases at 
1% in the next three years and link them to 
inflation in the subsequent two years. 

Rouzbeh Taheri, a spokesman for the 
campaign, calls these concessions “white- 
wash”. He is confident of securing the 
175,000 Signatures needed by June 25th to 
put the question on the ballot. Even if the 
vote takes place, and succeeds, it is non- 
binding. And were Berlin’s local authori- 
ties to enact it, Vonovia would challenge it 
in court, where the firm has a good chance 
of prevailing. Mr Buch clearly thinks the 
risk of becoming a political punching bag 
is worth it. Vonovia is offering to pay 25% 
over DW's volume-weighted average share 
price in the past three months (which was 
admittedly depressed by the rent-cap epi- 
sode), roughly equivalent to the book value 
of its portfolio after stripping out debt. 





The Economist May 29th 2021 


Cruise ships 


Cabin fervour 


An early victim of the pandemic seeks 
to refloat 


HE LATEST addition to the fleet of Carni- 
Tat the world’s biggest cruise operator, 
is the Mardi Gras. This ocean-going play- 
ground for 5,300 passengers comes com- 
plete with six different zones, including a 
“French Quarter’, two dozen restaurants 
and a rollercoaster. It is set to arrive at its 
base in Florida in early June. That is a year 
behind schedule—but possibly just in time 
for a revival of the industry, which has 
been hit harder than just about any other 
by the pandemic. 

Holidays afloat gave an early hint of 
covid-19’s damage to international travel. 
Images of passengers stranded aboard 
modern-day plague ships prefigured lock- 
downs on land. Most pundits reckon cross- 
border tourism will not fully rebound until 
2023. Yet cruising may steam ahead before 
then. “Where else can you go to bed at 
night and wake up every morning in a dif- 
ferent, new, exciting place?” ventures Ar- 
nold Donald, Carnival’s boss. 

A break at sea is a small niche of the glo- 
bal tourist industry. Of the 800m or so for- 
eign holiday-makers in 2019, only around 
30m ascended a gangway. It was, though, 
growing fast, adding over 10m more Sea- 
faring tourists in a decade. And before the 
pandemic drowned the business in red 
ink, it was lucrative. The three companies 
that transport three-quarters of all passen- 
gers—Carnival, Royal Caribbean and Nor- >> 





= f = 


= i [—_ Te. sq 


as * # & @ 





Anchors aweigh 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


>» wegian Cruise Line—raked in combined 
operating profits of $6.6bn on revenues 
of $38bn in 2019. 

With fleets mostly idle in the past year, 
cruise operators have been burning cash. 
Only a few of the world’s 270 large cruise 
ships are at sea with paying passengers. 
Luckily for Mr Donald, investors seem to 
Share his belief that the industry will roar 
back full-steam ahead. Carnival has had lit- 
tle trouble raising $24bn of debt and equity 
over the past12 months to tide it over; its ri- 
vals have also been able to tap the market. 

Now demand is returning. Carnival’s 


bookings for 2022 are back at the higher 
end of historical trends, its boss reports. 
The industry continues to expand long- 
term capacity. Over 100 vessels are on or- 
der; none has been cancelled during the 
pandemic. Perhaps the biggest headwind 
is countries’ fast-changing rules for inter- 
national travel, especially in America. Half 
of all tourist seafarers are North American, 
double the number of Europeans, the next 
largest group, with China and other emerg- 
ing markets far behind for now. Since the 
pandemic no ship has been allowed to set 
sail from an American port. 


The dangers of decision fatigue 


Why breaks are actually good for productivity 


«6 AVE A BREAK’ is a Slogan associat- 
H ed with the popular chocolate 
snack, KitKat. But it may be pretty good 
advice for any manager or worker, minus 
the calories. The longer the shift, the less 
effective the employee may become. 

In a new paper for Royal Society Open 
Finance, “Quantifying the cost of deci- 
sion fatigue: suboptimal risk decisions 
in finance”, Tobias Baer and Simone 
Schnall examine the credit decisions of 
loan officers at a leading bank over the 
course of their working day. The academ- 
ics write that decision fatigue “typically 
involves a tendency to revert to the ‘de- 
fault’ option, namely whatever choice 
involves relatively little mental effort”. In 
other words, as you become tired, you get 
mentally lazy. 

The study looked at proposals to 
restructure loans, with each credit officer 
analysing 46 requests per day. The ap- 
proval rate was around 40%, so the de- 
fault decision was rejection. Officers 
tended to start work between 8am and 
10am, took lunch between1pm and 3pm, 
and tended to leave at 6pm. 

The researchers found that the ap- 
proval rate declined significantly be- 
tween 11am and 2pm, as lunch ap- 
proached, then picked up again after 3pm 
before declining in the last two hours of 
work. The applications were distributed 
to credit officers by the bank’s automated 
system, so they were in effect allocated 
randomly. There is no sign that the loans 
assessed at lunchtime were of a different 
quality from those in the rest of the day. 

What makes this study ingenious is 
that the authors were able to see whether 
or not the loans were subsequently paid 
back. They found that rejecting a restruc- 
turing request made it less likely that the 
loan would be repaid. So they calculated 
that decision fatigue, by causing more 


rejections, actually cost the bank money; 
around $500,000 over the course of a 
single month. 

Similar patterns have been seen in 
other situations. A much-cited study of 
Israeli judges found they were less likely 
to grant parole as lunch approached, but 
became more lenient once their stomachs 
were full again. Other research found that 
doctors grew steadily more likely to pre- 
scribe antibiotics, even when these might 
not be necessary, over the course of their 
shift. In some areas of work, breaks are 
seen as a vital matter of safety. In the EU, 
lorry drivers are expected to take a 45- 
minute break after 4 hours 30 minutes 
behind the wheel. 

Mental activity can result in physical 
exhaustion, as anyone who has spenta 
day in successive meetings can attest. In 
the middle of a business trip, nothing can 
seem more enticing than the solitary 
silence of a hotel room, with no clients to 
amuse or placate in sight. Breaks can also 
boost creativity. It is easy for the brain to 
develop tunnel vision when it is working 
hard. There are times when the mind 








Business 61 


Mr Donald hopes that will change soon. 
Big cruise firms are trying to move things 
along by lobbying governments to allow 
vaccinated passengers who test negative 
for covid-19 to come onboard. That makes 
recent efforts by lawmakers in Florida to 
ban companies from using vaccine pass- 
ports rather unhelpful. The Sunshine State 
is home to not just the Mardi Gras but also 
to America’s largest cruise ports. & 


Listen to our interview with the CEO of 
Carnival Corporation at economist.com/ 
cruiseindustrypod 





needs to roam free. Kevin Cashman of 
Korn Ferry, a consultancy, and author ofa 
book, “The Pause Principle’, reports that 
executives say their best ideas often 
come when exercising, taking a shower 
or commuting. 

Taking a break by leaving the work- 
place, if only to go to the coffee shop, 
may be the sole practical way for workers 
to recharge mental batteries. Many peo- 
ple have hobbies—puzzles, crosswords, 
knitting—that are enjoyable because 
they engage only part of their conscious 
minds but still stave off boredom. 

However, such pastimes are regarded 
as impermissible at the office. This is 
ironic since they are unlikely to disturb 
anyone else, whereas chatting witha 
colleague, which is all too likely to do so, 
is seen as a perfectly acceptable diver- 
sion. One of the nicest elements of work- 
ing from home during the pandemic has 
been the ability to take breaks at the 
time, and in the style, of the employee's 
choosing (subject to the tyranny of the 
Zoom conferencing calendar). 

The lesson for managers is that what 
seems like “slacking” is actually a useful 
device for maintaining productivity. And 
the study of credit officers indicates that 
companies should look for ways to pro- 
tect workers against decision fatigue. 

One approach would be to give em- 
ployees more breaks, of course. But 
another might be to monitor decisions at 
certain times of the day. The bank that 
was the subject of the study could have 
ensured that loan decisions made just 
before lunch, or at the end of the day, 
were subject to review. Software could be 
used to “nudge” employees with a mes- 
sage like: “Your decision-making seems 
to have changed, maybe you want to take 
a break and reconsider.’ A pause should 
win applause. 


62 


Business 


Schumpeter | AT&T ina spin 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Not all u-turns are bad. How to make sense of corporate cock-ups 


~ & eo 





(€ QORRY’ IS NOT a word you hear often in business. Japanese 

miscreants may bow in shame. But in the West even archi- 
tects of some of the world’s most spectacular strategic blunders 
struggle to express remorse. It took Gerald Levin, boss of Time 
Warner, a decade to apologise for what he finally admitted was 
“the worst deal of the century”—the $165bn merger of the media 
giant with AOL, an internet firm, in 2001, during the dotcom crash. 
It was unravelled, ignominiously, eight years later. 

Who knows when—or indeed if—Randall Stephenson and his 
former lieutenant, John Stankey, will acknowledge how wrong 
they were to mastermind the $nobn acquisition of Time Warner 
by AT&T, which they completed in 2018. The combination created 
a company weighed down by huge debts, a high dividend and 
onerous investment demands. A mere three years later it, too, is 
being dismantled, with the media business spun out and merged 
with Discovery, another media firm. Mr Stankey, who took over 
from Mr Stephenson as the telecoms giant’s boss last year, has 
bowed notin shame, but to the inevitable. It was U-turn or bust. 

What to make of such strategic reversals? Itis usual to see them 
all as an indictment of megalomaniacal empire-builders and 
money-grubbing bankers, at the expense of staff and long-suffer- 
ing shareholders. And yet business, by its nature, is full of death- 
traps. Risks must be taken. Wrong turns happen. Course correc- 
tions are inevitable. Not all about-turns merit the equivalent of 
hara-kiri in the c-suite. Here is a rough guide to when they should 
and should not be tolerated. 

Start with experimentation, the essence of business in a world 
of constant flux. Most mergers and acquisitions are small, incre- 
mental bets. The payoffs can be large. When they go wrong, they 
cost shareholders money and generate bad headlines, but are for- 
givable if placed in a spirit of trial and error. Take Verizon, AT&T’s 
telecoms rival. The firm, now valued at $235bn, spent less than 
$10bn on AOL and Yahoo, its fellow internet pioneer, in the 
mid-2010s, hardly breaking the bank as it sought to build a media 
arm. Their sale, for $5bn plus 10% of shares in May, though embar- 
rassing, marked a retreat, not a rout—certainly compared with the 
tens of billions of shareholder value that analysts believe AT&T 
torched on its media binge. Call it misadventure, not madness. 


Then there is speculation. Some firms make a living by buying 
and selling other companies, often using flimsy rationales to jus- 
tify the purchases. u-turns are an occupational hazard. Head- 
lining this group is SoftBank, a Japanese tech conglomerate, 
whose twists and turns can cause motion sickness. It has flipped 
Sprint, an American mobile operator, and is in the process of do- 
ing the same with Arm, a British chip designer. Son Masayoshi, its 
billionaire founder, once portrayed both as strategic acquisitions. 
Even Warten Buffett, the no-frills chairman of Berkshire Hatha- 
way, a bigger, less techy conglomerate, occasionally pirouettes. 
Last year Berkshire dumped its holdings of airlines in America as 
the pandemic raged, just months after increasing its stakes. Air- 
lines have rallied since. “I don’t consider it a great moment in 
Berkshire’s history,’ Mr Buffett conceded recently, “but we have 
more net worth than any company on Earth.” 

Acquisitions are not the only danger zone. Sometimes a firm’s 
long-term strategy implodes, requiring a big rethink. GE, an in- 
dustrial group, boasted that GE Capital, its financial arm, was a 
profit-making machine before discovering that it was also a risky 
liability when the subprime crisis hit. Airbus, a European aero- 
Space company, halted production ofits A380 superjumbo after re- 
alising, 12 years into the programme, that airlines did not want it. 
Intel, no longer the world leader in chipmaking, will rent out 
some of its production facilities to others, as a foundry. These fall 
into the category of course corrections, not full-scale flip-flops. 

The screeching handbrake turn is in a different league. AT&T is 
not the only stodgy firm to have tried—and spectacularly failed— 
to reinvent itself overnight. Under its flamboyant boss J6M (Jean- 
Marie Messier Moi Méme, Maitre du Monde), Vivendi, born out ofa 
French water-and-sewage company, sought 20 years ago to re- 
fashion itself as a global entertainment giant, becoming one of 
France’s biggest corporate casualties in the process. European 
lenders, as well as Japan’s Nomura, an investment bank, have lost 
fortunes trying to become racier by buying Wall Street firms. Still, 
none compares to AT&T and Time Warner for the number of U- 
turns running through their combined corporate history. 

It is worth watching out for three danger signs. First, be alert 
when deals are billed as transformative. Looking through the fine 
print of AT&T’s purchase of Time Warner, the main justification, to 
track customers to sell advertising, was flimsy; it did not warrant 
the cost. Yet shareholders blithely gave it their blessing. Second, it 
was no small experiment: the whole company was put on the line. 
Third, it produced big opportunity costs. The acquisition of Time 
Warner and DirecTV, a satellite-Tv company, in 2015, turned AT&T 
into America’s biggest non-financial corporate borrower. That 
constrained it when it needed to spend on 5G mobile spectrum 
and the Hollywood streaming wars. Even with the Discovery deal 
and its first dividend cut in decades, itis not out of the woods. 


U-turn, you pay the price 

The moral of the story is that when deals go wrong, the faster they 
are unravelled the better. But when they are so big that they jeop- 
ardise the future of the firm, accountability is vital, too. Mr Ste- 
phenson pocketed $90m from AT&T between 2018, when the Time 
Warner deal was completed, and the end of 2020, when he left the 
post of executive chairman. Mr Stankey has earned $60m. Mr Ste- 
phenson is gone. Mr Stankey should go, too, if nothing else than to 
serve as a deterrent against future acts of M&A madness. There 
may be no apologies in business. But failure on such a grand scale 
should at least carry apricetag. @ 








Thal 
| 
| 
I | 


Wi 


The coming capex carnival 


Companies across the world are spending big. We analyse their investment plans 


S LOCKDOWNS LIFT across the rich 
Awora people are going out and spend- 
ing. Australia’s restaurants have been 
crammed for months. America’s shopping 
malls are filled with people splurging stim- 
ulus cheques. Cinemas in Britain, which 
were allowed to reopen in mid-May, are 
packed once again. Yet behind the scenes 
another, potentially more significant, 
spending bonanza is just beginning. 

Businesses are starting to invest in 
huge numbers. In America capital spend- 
ing (Or capex) by companies is rising at an 
annual rate of 15%, both on the hard stuff, 
such as machines and factories, and intan- 
gibles, like software. Firms in other parts of 
the world are also ramping up spending. 
Forecasts for business investment have 
never looked so rosy. Analysts at Morgan 
Stanley, a bank, predict a “red-hot capex 
cycle”. Overall global investment, they 
reckon, will soar to 121% of pre-recession 
levels by the end of 2022 (see chartion next 
page). Oxford Economics, a consultancy, 
argues that “the time looks right fora boom 
in capex”, while IHS Markit, a research 
firm, forecasts that global real fixed invest- 


ment will rise by more than 6% this year. 
Today’s optimism marks quite a change 
from the pre-pandemic norm. In America 
gross domestic business investment, as a 
Share of GpP, had been sluggish since the 
early 1980s. After the financial crisis of 
2007-09 it took more than two years for 
global investment, in real terms, to regain 
its previous peak. By contrast, although in- 
vestment fell more steeply at the start of 
the pandemic, it has been quicker to 
bounce back this time. The prospect of 
surging capex holds out promise that the 








64 Europe's unequal recovery 
66 Buttonwood: The crypto-fiat divide 
67 The best public investment ever? 


67 America's hot housing market... 











68 ...and morbid property deals in France 
69 Chasing Chinese assets 


70 Free exchange: Inflation fears 





global economy will not face a repeat of the 
2010S, when growth in productivity and 
GDP stayed stubbornly below pre-crisis 
trends. Investment in new products, tech- 
nologies and business practices is, after 
all, the foundation for higher incomes and 
a better quality of life. So what is behind 
the capex cheer—and could it last? 

To understand why analysts are so up- 
beat, consider the firms included in the 
S&P 500, America’s main stockmarket in- 
dex. Together they account for about one 
dollar in seven of total rich-world cor- 
porate capital formation. Ina recent report 
Bank of America analyses these compa- 
nies’ earnings calls since 2006, and con- 
cludes that executives are at their most 
bullish about capex. The Economist has 
looked at the biggest 25 non-financial 
firms in the S&P 500 and found that an- 
alysts’ expectations for capex in 2021 have 
risen by 10% in the past year. 

For now the investment recovery is 
concentrated in a few industries. We find 
that global tech firms are expected to boost 
capex by 42% this year, relative to 2019. Ap- 
ple will invest $430bn in America over a 
five-year period, an upgrade of 20% on pre- 
vious plans. Taiwan’s TSMc, the world’s 
largest semiconductor-maker, recently an- 
nounced that it would invest $100bn over 
the next three years in manufacturing. An- 
alysts reckon that Samsung’s capex will 
rise by 13% this year, having gone up by 
45% in 2020. 

Tech companies are spending so freely 
in part because the pandemic has created | 


64 Finance & economics 


»>new demands. More shopping happens 
online. Remote work is on the rise. New 
equipment and software is needed for 
these to run smoothly. Recent research by 
Nicholas Bloom of Stanford University and 
Steven Davis and Yulia Zhestkova of the 
University of Chicago finds a big rise in the 
Share of patent filings for work-from- 
home technologies. UBS, another bank, 
reckons that shipments of computers for 
commercial use will rise by nearly 10% this 
year, an acceleration even over the last. 

Tech firms are not the only enthusiastic 
spenders. Firms in the S&P 500 that focus 
on discretionary consumer spending 
boosted capex by 36% year-on-year in the 
first quarter. Companies such as Target and 
Walmart, two retailers, are trying to keep 
up with the online giants that are eating 
their lunch. Marks & Spencer, an august 
British retailer, recently announced that it 
had launched 46 new websites in overseas 
markets from Iceland to Uzbekistan. 

Other retailers are spending frantically 
to expand capacity, having been caught out 
by the surge in household spending. Every- 
thing from sofas to hot tubs is in short sup- 
ply. Earlier this year Peloton announced 
“substantial incremental investments” in 
expediting the transport of its exercise 
bikes from Taiwan. Maersk, a shipping 
firm, recently said it would buy more con- 
tainers to ease bottlenecks. The global or- 
der-book for enormous container ships 
has risen from 9% of the existing fleet, in 
October, to over 15% in April. 

The big question is whether the emerg- 
ing capex boom augurs a broad and lasting 
shift away from the weakness of the 2010s, 
or is simply an enthusiastic but temporary 
response to reopening. Not everyone is 
boosting capex: our analysis suggests that 
about half of the companies in the S&P 500 
are not expected to invest more in 2021 
than they did in 2019. Global oil-and-gas 
firms are cutting back by a tenth relative to 
pre-pandemic levels, possibly in response 
to lower expected demand for their planet- 
warming fare. Airline operators are also 
dialling down spending, perhaps because 


Fe 

On a spending spree 

Global real investment* 

Quarter before start of recession=100 


130 
120 
110 
100 


Global financial crisis 90 


Covid-19 recession 







) 
Forecast <»#** 
ae 





80 


a 
ae) = 0 5) LO oe Oe 


Quarters before/after start of recession 


Sources: Haver Analytics; 
Morgan Stanley Research 
forecasts; national statistics 


*Average weighted by 
purchasing-power parity 


az 

Feeling flush 

S&P 500 non-financial firms, cash holdings 
$trn 


0.9 
0.6 


0.3 


2000 05 10 15 js 


Source: Bloomberg 


they expect it to be a while before people 
can travel freely again. Many executives, 
including those from raw-materials and 
industrial-goods firms, continue to preach 
capital discipline. It may be quite a leap for 
them to go from a decade of austerity to 
boom time. 

Another worry is the trend towards 
greater consolidation in industries from 
hotels to mining, which seems unlikely to 
have been reversed by covid-19. Research 
by the IMF suggests that companies with 
market power may be less Keen on invest- 
ing. In the five years before the pandemic, 
for instance, American business invest- 
ment in hotels was barely higher than it 
was in the five years before the financial 
crisis, even though demand was far higher. 

Set against that, though, economic con- 
ditions today could convince reluctant 
companies to loosen the purse-strings. In 
contrast to the post-financial-crisis per- 
iod, households have a lot of savings to 
spend. A more decisive fiscal and mone- 
tary response this time has also allowed 
firms to load up on cash (see chart 2). Bond 
issuance by investment-grade-rated Amer- 
ican companies jumped to a record $1.7trn 
in 2020, up from $1.1trn in 2019, according 
to S&P Global Market Intelligence, a re- 
Search outfit. 

Moreover, the economic reallocation 
provoked by covid-19, and its investment 
implications, will be felt for some time. 
Managers in certain industries, especially 
semiconductors, already accept that they 
went into the pandemic with too little 
Spare capacity, and are promising multi- 
year projects to make up for it. Perhaps 
most important, the pandemic is leading 
to an era of greater technological opti- 
mism. The rapid deployment of entirely 
new business models when covid-19 
struck, not to mention vaccine discovery, 
may have reminded bosses of the payoff to 
investing. All that might explain why the 
expectations for capex by S&P 500 firms in 
2022 are even more ambitious than those 
for this year. The investment boom may 
only be getting started. 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


The euro zone 


Dividing lines 


Activity is surging as lockdowns end. 
But the recovery will be unequal 


NOCKED BACK by several bouts of co- 
K vides, Europe’s economy is now find- 
ing its feet. Its vaccination drive is charg- 
ing ahead, and lockdown restrictions are 
easing. On May 17th Italy’s curfew moved 
from 10pm to 11pm, and on May 19th Pari- 
Sians were allowed to return to their be- 
loved cafés, after six months without. Ger- 
man companies are at their most optimis- 
tic in two years, according to figures re- 
leased on May 25th, and wider economic 
sentiment is surging. The relief is wide- 
spread. The recovery will be less so. 

Europe went into the covid-19 crisis 
with scars still unhealed, as northern 
countries, such as Germany, outperformed 
southern ones, such as Spain and Italy. The 
pandemic rubbed salt in the wounds. Be- 
tween the final quarter of 2019 and the sec- 
ond quarter of 2020 household consump- 
tion in Spain and Italy fell by 30% and 20% 
respectively, compared with just 1% in 
Germany. Punishing lockdowns and a 
drought in tourist revenues have pro- 


longed the pain. By the end of 2020, con- >> 


On the mend 


Job openings, February 1st 2020=100 








France 80 


Spain 60 


40 


FMAM })}]ASONDJEMAM 
2020 2071 


Excess household saving, extra saving in 2020 
compared with 2019, % of disposable income in 2019 

0 4 4 6 8 
Spain = = 
Italy 
France 
Germany 





Planned consumer spending™, % increase 
post-pandemic compared with April 2021 


0 3 6 9 [2 ips) 
Spain 
Italy 
France 
Germany 


Sources: Indeed; OECD; 
UBS Evidence Lab 





*Based on survey responses, 
weighted by income 


EVENTS 


-— 
ee 


» = 
— 
~ 


Virtual event, June 17th 2021, 7:30am 


— ~ 
_ a 
— = ~— 
4 " 
" bal 
‘ y 
| = 





risk from the C-suite 


The world of finance is changing. 
Are you ready? 


How have leaders ensured that ethics and a culture 
of compliance are at the heart of increasingly 
decentralised workplaces? 


What potential does technology have to further 
olat-Jayx-mualouanlolel=laemiiar-lalel-lmiaciaidelulo)ar 


Join C-level executives from all corners of the finance 
industry to discuss the future of compliance in a 
changing world. 


| =, navigatingrisk.economist.com 
mat Spaces are limited - secure your place today. 





SJolo)aiso)n=16 I 9)\7 


=] PANAOD 





Rachana Shanbhogue 
miarelalecnsvel ines 
The Economist 


Erkin Adylov 
Chief executive officer 
Behavox 


Bruce Karpati 

ifo)oy-] Keni (-meolnaleit-lares 
officer and counsel 
KKR 


66 Finance & economics 


> sumption in Italy and in Spain was more 
than a tenth below its pre-crisis peak, com- 
pared with a shortfall of 6% in Germany 
and 7% in France. 

Some indicators suggest that the worst- 
hit countries are bouncing back faster. Mo- 
bility data from Google from mid-May sug- 
gest that travel for recreation and retail was 
returning to normal more quickly in Italy 
and Spain than in France and Germany, 
perhaps because they reopened earlier. 
Others indicate divergence. Figures from 
Indeed, a job-search platform, suggest that 
the recovery in vacancies posted by em- 


ployers in Italy is well ahead of those in 
France and Germany, let alone Spain (see 
chart on previous page). 

Beyond the immediate bump associat- 
ed with fewer restrictions at home, three 
factors will influence the evenness of the 
recovery. The first is the extent to which ex- 
ternal constraints ease. Looser travel re- 
Strictions are important for Spain, where 
revenues from tourism made up 12% of 
GDP before the pandemic. The strength of 
Germany's industrial boom, meanwhile, 
relies on bottlenecks along the supply 
chain being resolved. 


The anti-flat punto 


The boundary between crypto and fiat money is more permeable than you think 


INANCE HAS its squabbling tribes, 

much like the rest of society. A contest 
that attracts a lot of attention just now is 
the demographic-cum-digital divide 
between crypto kids and fiat dinosaurs. 
The crypto kids believe that blockchain- 
based finance is the future and a haven 
from the inevitable degradation of fiat 
money. In the opposite corner are the 
titanosaurs of the fiat world, the central 
bankers. “I’m sceptical about crypto 
assets, frankly, because they are danger- 
ous,’ said Andrew Bailey, the Bank of 
England’s boss, this week. 

This is a good moment for the dino- 
saurs. The dollar price of bitcoin, the 
mainstay of crypto assets, fell from 
$58,000 or SO in mid-May to around 
$33,000 in the space of a couple of weeks. 
The steepest part of that decline came 
after Tesla’s chief executive, Elon Musk, 
said his firm would suspend its policy of 
accepting bitcoin for purchases of its 
cars. A pledge by Chinese regulators to 
crack down on the mining of bitcoin gave 
the sell-off additional impetus. 

The consequences have so far been 
few. Because there has been no visible 
collateral damage, crypto has been wide- 
ly seen as a Side-show in financial mar- 
kets. This view is too dismissive, though. 
Crypto, like gold, is built ona collective 
belief about its value. But so to an extent 
are all asset prices. And crypto is moving 
past the point where it can be considered 
its own Self-contained world. 

To understand bitcoin’s ascent it 
helps to go back to the work of Thomas 
Schelling, a Nobel-prizewinning econo- 
mist and game theorist. Schelling con- 
tended that people are often able to act 
tacitly in concert if they know that others 
are trying to do the same. Many situa- 
tions throw up aclue, a “focal point”, 
around which people can co-ordinate 


without explicitly agreeing to do so. For 
instance, if asked to pick a positive num- 
ber, people will offer a variety of respons- 
es—one, seven, 100 and so on; but if asked 
to choose a number that others will also 
select, there is a preponderant choice: the 
number one. 

This insight applies to certain assets 
that lack intrinsic value. The investment 
case for gold, said Schelling, can best be 
explained as a solution to a co-ordination 
game. Gold bars have value because 
enough people tacitly agree that they do. 
Their value is bolstered by their scarcity, 
and their longevity. Willem Buiter, a 
prominent economist, once aptly called 
gold the “six-thousand-year-old bubble”. 
Bitcoin is newer, but similar. Yes, the 
technology behind it is ingenious (al- 
though Ethereum, the next-most-valuable 
crypto asset, arguably has the more com- 
pelling user case). And, yes, bitcoin is used 
in transactions, if no longer for Tesla’s 
cars. But its selling points are scarcity and 
fame. It is anatural focal point. As with 
gold, you can make a theoretical case that 
itis proof against paper-money inflation. 





The Economist May 29th 2021 


The second factor is the extent to which 
consumers spend their accumulated cash. 
Their larger piles of “excess” savings could 
help harder-hit countries catch up. Com- 
pared with the French and the Germans, 
Italians and Spaniards stashed away much 
more in 2020 than they did in 2019. That 
does not mean they will spend all of it, 
though. A survey of 5,000 European con- 
Sumers by UBS, a bank, suggests Spanish 
consumers plan to splurge less than oth- 
ers. Given the sorry state of the labour mar- 
ket, that caution is hardly surprising. In 
March the unemployment rate was 15%, >> 





The latest gyrations seem to confirm 
that crypto is a walled garden unconnect- 
ed with the rest of finance. But if you 
look more closely a different pattern is 
emerging. There is already a pathway 
linking crypto prices with gold. Flows 
into exchange-traded funds (ETFs) that 
invest in gold started to revive just as 
money was flowing out of bitcoin futures 
and ETFS, according to a recent analysis 
by Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou of JPMorgan 
Chase, a bank. That suggests that in- 
stitutional investors are shifting back 
into gold after a flurry of interest in 
crypto, because bitcoin prices had risen 
too quickly. Viewed this way, the fall of 
bitcoin and the revival of gold are a rela- 
tive-value trade within the broader set of 
inflation hedges. 

Furthermore, it is hard to shake off 
the feeling that crypto-crashes now 
matter. This is the third bear market in 
four years, but alot more money is now 
involved. The market capitalisation of 
cryptocurrencies tracked by a specialist 
website, coingecko.com, was more than 
$2.5trn in mid-May. A fortnight later it 
had fallen to $1.5trn. That is a big loss in 
anyone’s money. Crypto prices are creep- 
ing up again, so those losses are already 
being eroded. But at each new peak, the 
asset class looms ever larger. And a dollar 
lost in crypto investing is the same asa 
dollar that was once earned or bor- 
rowed—even if, at present, it is hard to 
know precisely who bears the loss. 

There is something else to consider. 
Cryptocurrencies are highly speculative 
assets. It is thus hard not to think of their 
prices as a signal of shifts in risk appetite 
more broadly. Beliefs matter for all sorts 
of asset prices, whether in dollars or 
bitcoin. You might be able to dismiss this 
crypto-crash. But the next one will be 
harder to ignore. 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


» three times that in Germany. 

The third factor influencing the recov- 
ery is the strength of governments’ fiscal 
response. A fear of divergence has already 
motivated the EU's recovery fund. This will 
direct more cash to Italy and Spain, and 
could boost growth there by more than 
twice as much as in France and Germany, 
reckons S&P, a rating agency. But at a meet- 
ing on May 21st-22nd economists from 
Bruegel, a think-tank, warned European fi- 
nance ministers that they might need to go 
further. Given that many forecasters ex- 
pect the EU not to reach its pre-pandemic 
level of output until 2022, another round 
of stimulus could help tackle the other in- 
equalities that have arisen during the pan- 
demic, such as the extra burdens borne by 
the young and the less educated. 

Look beyond the immediate recovery, 
and the prospects for convergence seem 
limited. Support from the recovery fund 
notwithstanding, the IMF's latest forecasts 
suggest that Italy's economy will shrink by 
0.1% between 2019 and 2023, while Spain’s 
expands by a paltry 1.9%. France and Ger- 
many, meanwhile, are expected to grow by 
2.9% and 3.5% respectively. Without more 
support, the economies that were lagging 
behind even before the pandemic will see 
their recovery slow toacrawl. @ 


Covid-19 


The best public 
investment ever 


HONG KONG 
What will it cost to end the pandemic? 


N MAY 2ND thousands of masked nur- 
O ses doctors and others who have bat- 
tled against covid-19 watched Jennifer Lo- 
pez and other stars perform in the flesh at 
the “vax live” concert in Los Angeles. Out- 
side the venue, visitors could get their jab 
from the comfort of their own vehicles, 
while watching H.E.R., a singer-songwrit- 
er, perform the song “Glory” in the car 
park, surrounded by schoolkids stomping 
their feet. A live concert was possible only 
because many Americans (50% of adults) 
are now vaccinated. But a charity event of 
this kind was necessary only because most 
of the world is not. 

What would it take to close the gap? Ina 
paper published in April, Ruchir Agarwal 
of the IMF and Tristan Reed of the World 
Bank argued that it might be possible to 
end the “acute phase” of the pandemic ear- 
ly next year by vaccinating 60% of the pop- 
ulation of every country. Will there be 
enough shots to go round? In principle, 
yes. According to Airfinity, a life-sciences 
data firm, vaccine-makers could produce 


as many as 11.1bn doses this year, enough to 
inoculate more than 75% of the world’s 
population aged over five. The manufac- 
turers themselves say they will produce 
many more. 

Some of this capacity is already spoken 
for. But rich countries have hogged less of 
it than many people fear. Mr Agarwal and 
Mr Reed calculate that rich countries have 
placed advance orders for about 2bn cours- 
es (many of which comprise two shots). At 
the same time, the developing world alrea- 
dy has dibs on more vaccines than some 
people assume, thanks to deals struck by 
organisations like the African Union and 
COVAX, a vaccine-sharing initiative. Mr 
Agarwal and Mr Reed calculate that 91 de- 
veloping countries (with a combined pop- 
ulation of over 2.5bn people) need to order 
only another 350m courses between them 
to vaccinate 60% of their population. India 
faces a bigger shortfall. But it also has the 
dollars and domestic manufacturing ca- 
pacity to reach the target eventually. 

Mr Agarwal and Gita Gopinath, the 
IMF's chief economist, have now turned 
this insight into a broader $50bn “proposal 
to end the covid-19 pandemic” (see chart). 
Only $4bn of the headline total is neces- 
sary to buy the 350m extra vaccination 
courses. The rest is earmarked for other 
tasks, such as helping countries get vac- 
cines into people’s arms, keeping a lookout 
for new variants, expanding testing and 
treatment, and adding another 1bn doses of 
vaccine-making capacity next year as in- 
surance, in case anything goes wrong. Not 
everything on their wishlist is costly. The 
two economists reckon the developing 
world could vaccinate almost 40% of its 
population by the end of 2021 if rich coun- 
tries donated even half of the surplus vac- 
cines they are likely to amass this year. 

The proposal is ambitious. But circum- 
spection will only make the problems 
posed by the pandemic harder to fix. With- 
out firm commitments to buy vaccines, 
manufacturers will have less reason to re- 
solve any bottlenecks in their supply 
chains. A scarcity of shots will encourage 


SS 

The shopping list 

IMF proposal to end the pandemic 
Funding gap, $bn 


20 Extra testing, treatments and protective equipment 


—ES==a2 Adding vaccine capacity in 2022 
——ES=e=s Preparing for vaccine roll-out 


Extra money for COVAX to buy vaccines 


Strengthening public-health systems 
Checks for new variants and supply-chain shocks 


Other measures 


Evaluating dose-stretching strategies 
nil Ensuring free trade in vaccines and materials 














nil Donating surplus vaccines 


Source: ‘A proposal to end the covid-19 pandemic’, by 
Ruchir Agarwal and Gita Gopinath, IMF, May 2021 


Finance & economics 


counterproductive bans on exports of vac- 
cines and materials. If poor countries do 
not know when vaccines will arrive, they 
will find it harder to prepare a successful 
roll-out. And slow vaccination will make 
new variants more likely. 

Conversely, an early end to the pandem- 
ic could add as much as $8trn (at market 
exchange rates) to global GDP spread over 
the next few years, according to the IMF, 
and raise tax revenues in the rich world by 
$itrn. “Funding this proposal”, the authors 
argue, “may possibly be the highest-return 
public investment ever.” Glory, indeed. @ 


Inflation 


House on fire 


What America’s hot housing market 
means for consumer prices 


HE AMERICAN economy last year may 

have suffered its deepest downturn 
since the Depression, but you would not 
know it from house prices. The Case-Shill- 
er national house-price index is rising at 
an annual rate of 13%, its fastest for more 
than 15 years (see chart on next page). Low- 
er interest rates have encouraged people to 
take out bigger mortgages, and trillions of 
dollars of fiscal stimulus have let people 
spend more on housing. 

Yet as prices have breezed ahead, rental 
growth, which usually follows suit, has 
Sharply slowed. And whether rents catch 
up or not matters, because they play an 
outsize role in America’s consumer-price 
inflation statistics. In a recent note an- 
alysts at Goldman Sachs, a bank, ranked 
housing costs among their three main “up- 
Side” risks to inflation, together with wag- 
es and inflation expectations. Alan Det- 
meister of UBS, another bank, went fur- 
ther, arguing that “it is only a small exag- 
geration to say that there is no single 
variable on which global financial markets 
depend more this year than Us rents.” The 
behaviour of rental inflation could influ- 
ence the Federal Reserve’s decision to 
withdraw its support for the economy— 
which would in turn affect everything 
from the strength of America’s recovery to 
the valuations of an array of assets. 

America’s. statisticians, like those 
across the rich world, do not include house 
prices in inflation metrics: the thinking 
runs that house purchases are in large part 
an investment, rather than purely a con- 
sumption good. Instead they focus on two 
other measures of housing costs. One is 
the rents actually paid by tenants. The oth- 
er is an estimate of what homeowners 


67 


would need to pay in order to rent their >> 


68 


Finance & economics 


eS] 
Suburban sprawl 


United States, housing-cost measures 
% change on a year earlier 


3 

\ Price-of- Case-Shiller = y 4, 
shelter //\ house-price 

\ index* f \ index es e 


















\ NN. J Goldman Sachs 5 
\ " Shelter Inflation 
| Trackert ze 





2005 07 09 11 #13 #15 17 «+19 21 
*Component of personal-consumption-expenditure inflation 
TWeighted average of four rent measures 


Sources: S&P Global; Goldman Sachs; 
Bureau of Economic Analysis 


» house. Despite boomy prices, rents are ris- 


ing at just 2% a year, about half the pace 
seen just before the pandemic. 

Economists puzzle over this diver- 
gence. Americans’ growing fondness for 
homeownership means more competition 
for owner-occupied properties but less for 
tenancies. Renters are more likely than 
homeowners to have lost their jobs in the 
past year, and may thus have negotiated 
rent holidays or discounts. Some landlords 
in San Francisco are so desperate for new 
tenants that they are even offering bonuses 
to people who sign a lease. 

Over the long run, however, economic 
theory suggests that rents and prices 
should move in tandem (ie, the ratio of 
house prices to rents should be stable). If 
rental growth catches up with prices, that 
could have a big effect. Rents make up one- 
fifth of the basket used to calculate “core” 
personal-consumption-expenditure (PCE) 
inflation, which excludes food and ener- 
gy—the gauge most closely watched by the 
Fed. If annual rent inflation rose to 4% a 
year—not far off where it was shortly be- 
fore the pandemic—overall core inflation 
would rise by 0.5 percentage points. 

Could this happen? As the economy re- 
covers, landlords may hope to make up for 
lost time. “We expect a rental-market re- 
Surgence in 2021,’ said Zillow, a property 
firm, in a report in December, “with rents 
increasing...and demand for rental hous- 
ing strengthening.” A recovery in low-wage 
employment should boost rents: housing- 
cost inflation tends to rise when the unem- 
ployment rate falls. A survey by the New 
York Fed in April found that households 
expected rents to rise by 10% in the coming 
year, up from expectations of 5%, on aver- 
age, 1n 2020. 

Rental inflation is thus likely to rise in 
the coming months. But by how much is 
another question. There are reasons to 
think the price-to-rent ratio could settle at 
a permanently higher level. When interest 
rates are so low, for instance, people are 
willing to pay more for the right to a given 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Terminal value 


PARIS 
A ghoulish financial product gets a fresh lease of life 


HO HAS not dreamed of owning 
V V/ a pied-a-terre in Paris, or perhaps 
overlooking the Mediterranean? How 
about betting on the timing of a perfect 
Stranger’s death? In France you can com- 
bine the two. In sales of property en 
viager a buyer pays upfront for a resi- 
dence while getting the keys only when 
the current owner dies. Covid-19 has 
revived interest in the morbid scheme. 
The concept of viagers is nearly as old 
as property; rules laying out its modal- 
ities go back over a thousand years. 
Typically the seller gets cash for arounda 
third of the value of the home at the time 
of the sale. Monthly payments from the 
buyer should add up to something nearer 
the full value of the property—assuming 
the seller dies at the time suggested by 
actuarial tables. 
For Sellers not afraid of tempting fate, 
viagers offer the chance to cash in on 
their homes yet stay in them, with an 





Don't bet on it 


stream of income. American price-to-rent 
ratios are higher today than in the 1980s, 
which coincides with declines in real in- 
terest rates. 

A slower pace of housing construction 
may also keep price-to-rent ratios higher, 
Suggests anew paper by Christian Hilber of 
the London School of Economics and An- 
dreas Mense of the University of Erlangen- 
Nuremberg. In thriving areas where the 
supply of housing is constrained, buyers 
may be willing to bid up prices in the ex- 
pectation of strong rental growth in the fu- 
ture. In recent years America has become 


income to boot. That appealed all the 
more as covid-19 began to spread, and 
death rates in retirement homes soared. 
Specialist brokers reported a surge in 
enquiries as elderly people sought to 
remain in their homes for longer. 

Even then, the estimated 5,000 viager 
deals signed in France every year repre- 
sent less than 1% of all property sales. But 
the scheme’s long-expected demise 
never seems to come. Authorities pro- 
mote it as a tax-efficient way for pension- 
ers to cash in on rising property prices. 
Viagers also allow buyers to invest in 
property without a mortgage—the lender 
is, in effect, the seller-cum-tenant for 
life. The discount on properties sold for 
occupation at an unspecified time in the 
future is also an attraction. 

Buyers of viager properties have to 
guess how long the kindly old grand- 
father on the other side of the deal has 
left. Ads for such sales come with de- 
scriptions of the place in question—and 
details of the age of the seller. Canny 
widows looking to cash out are known to 
light cigarettes ahead of visits by poten- 
tial buyers to hint at their unhealthy 
lifestyles. All parties are aware of the 
industry’s freak event. In 1965 a 47-year- 
old notary bought a home en viager from 
a frail 90-year-old lady. He died 30 years 
later, but his widow kept making annuity 
payments, as the seller, Jeanne Calment, 
lived on to the world-beating age of 122. 

Fans of viagers point out that betting 
on death is hardly unusual in finance: 
just look at the life-insurance industry. 
But the sinister undertones of such 
arrangements are hard to shake off. Some 
buyers have been suspected of hurrying 
nature along. In at least two murders 
currently in front of courts, authorities 
allege buyers did away with their tenants 
to gain possession of viager properties. 


worse at building new houses, in part be- 
cause of tougher land-use regulations. 

American price-to-rent ratios could of 
course adjust in another way—through 
prices falling, rather than rents rising. Just 
as share prices are more volatile than divi- 
dends, house prices are more up-and- 
down than rents. And Mr Detmeister’s his- 
torical analysis suggests that two-thirds of 
any adjustment in price-to-rent ratios 
tends to fall on prices. In other words, 
America might be able to have either a 
strong housing market or quiescent infla- 
tion—but not both. m 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Investing in China 


The cross-border chase 


HONG KONG 


Foreign investors have long had little recourse when Chinese firms go bust. 


That could be changing 


ISSIDENTS, SMUGGLERS and rogue ex- 
| peer have been hiding out on ei- 
ther side of the 40km border between 
Hong Kong and China for generations. De- 
Spite being part of the same country since 
1997, the two jurisdictions have separate le- 
gal systems with limited interaction. Chi- 
nese companies have crossed the border in 
droves since the 1990s to access global cap- 
ital markets. Investors, trusting in Hong 
Kong's independent legal system, have met 
them there, cash in hand. But when Chi- 
nese groups struggle to repay their deDts, 
investors seldom attempt to chase them 
back over the border, where the bulk of the 
companies’ assets are located. Enforcing 
cross-border claims has been excruciating- 
ly difficult and often futile. That could now 
be changing, with important consequenc- 
es for creditors both at home and abroad. 

Global investors have long accepted the 
tenuous links between their money and 
Chinese assets. Take, for example, the legal 
structures known as variable-interest enti- 
ties (VIES) that have been used to connect 
hundreds of billions of foreign investors’ 
dollars with Chinese-issued shares, de- 
spite having scant legal recognition in Chi- 
na. In the debt markets so-called keepwell 
deeds have thrived as a way of keeping off- 
shore investors’ nerves under control. 
They are a type of promissory note that ob- 
liges parent groups to help pay back inves- 
tors should an offshore subsidiary default. 
But no investor has ever successfully used 
these notes, which back some $9o0bn in 
dollar-denominated bonds, to force on- 
shore companies to pay offshore debts. 
Creditor committees have been used to re- 
structure debts that span the border. But 
more broadly it is rare that a Chinese court 
dealing with an insolvency case has recog- 
nised proceedings launched outside the 
mainland, including in Hong Kong. 

The recent turmoil unleashed by Hua- 
rong Asset Management, a state-owned 
Chinese financial firm with $22bn in off- 
shore debts, could cast a harsh glare on the 
disconnect between courts in China and 
Hong Kong. Huarong is the largest Chinese 
issuer of dollar-denominated debt, and the 
largest user of keepwell deeds. The Beijing- 
based group has not published its financial 
Statements for 2020, leading to specula- 
tion that it will be restructured. Its troubles 
have sent yields on other state-backed debt 
Soaring. Given the size of its borrowings 
and the scope of investors exposed to Hua- 


rong, a default by the group would force as- 
set managers and hedge funds to rethink 
how they invest in state companies. 

One question is whether keepwell 
deeds live up to their name. In January ad- 
ministrators in Beijing rejected creditors’ 
cross-border claims on Peking University 
Founder Group, a tech company linked to 
one of China’s top universities, because its 
keepwell deeds were based on English, not 
Chinese, law. The decision does not bode 
well for Huarong’s creditors. Investors fear 
that any restructuring will prioritise on- 
shore bondholders over those sitting just 
south of the Chinese border. “Keepwells 
will either go away or be redefined,” says 
Alaa Bushehri of BNP Paribas Asset Man- 
agement. Huge losses stemming from 
Huarong could even damage Hong Kong's 
reputation. “Cross-border investors may 
not find enough protection in Hong Kong, 
which may hurt its role as a fixed-income 
offshore centre for Chinese firms,” Natixis, 
a French bank, noted in a research report. 

Keepwells may not bea ticket across the 
border. But a parallel test of the legal fire- 
wall between China and Hong Kong is also 
playing out this year. On May 14th courts 
on both sides of the border said they could 
begin to mutually recognise some insol- 
vency cases. The pilot project will help 
courts in Shanghai, Shenzhen and Xiamen 
acknowledge restructuring or liquidation 
orders from Hong Kong courts that involve 
assets in the three mainland cities. 


Finance & economics 


The scope for the test is narrow. Claim- 
ants must prove that the company’s “centre 
of main interests” is in Hong Kong. This 
could be tricky; most Chinese firms listed 
in Hong Kong are incorporated in offshore 
centres such as the Cayman Islands. Over 
time, though, as courts on both sides of the 
border become more familiar with each 
other, it could “potentially break down the 
high barrier” between mainland China and 
Hong Kong, says Look Chan Ho, a barrister 
in Hong Kong who helped design the pilot. 
That could take years, warns another law- 
yer, who sees the pilot as largely symbolic. 

Nevertheless, cross-border recognition 
for insolvency cases has taken on a new ur- 
gency for Chinese courts. It is not just for- 
eign investors who are anxious for re- 
course. In recent years Chinese groups 
have fanned out across the globe, hoover- 
ing up flashy assets. Many, notably HNA, an 
airlines-to-finance conglomerate, have 
fallen on hard times. State creditors are ea- 
ger to recover their losses by making 
claims on foreign assets, but may need rec- 
ognition from foreign courts to do so. Reci- 
procity could help the Communist Party 
clean up the corporate mess. 

China has not adopted the UN’s frame- 
work on cross-border insolvency, which is 
widely used for international restructur- 
ing. But its courts are seeking recognition 
abroad. In 2019 a bankruptcy case under 
Chinese law received recognition by an 
American court for only the second time. 
That ruling stopped other claims on the 
Chinese firm’s assets in America. In 2020,a 
Hong Kong court recognised a Chinese in- 
solvency case concerning CEFC Shanghai 
International, part of a failed conglomer- 
ate that had gone ona spree in former Sovi- 
et republics. Both cases show that traffic 
between China and the rest of the world is 
increasingly two-way—leaving troubled 
executives with nowhere to hide. @ 





69 


70 Finance & economics 


Free exchange | Hot stuff 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


When does transitory inflation become sustained? Some lessons from the 1970s 





T NEARLY 43 years old, the median American worker has never 
Ain her career experienced an annual rate of “core” inflation, 
which excludes volatile food and energy prices, above 3%. That 
will soon change. Core consumer prices in America rose by 0.9% 
month-on-month in April, the highest jump since 1982, practically 
guaranteeing that the annual rate will exceed 3% in the near fu- 
ture. Some economists sense the first stirrings of an outbreak of 
sustained high inflation, like that which afflicted many countries 
in the 1970s. But prevailing theories of inflation suggest that, for 
now at least, this threat remains remote. 

The Great Inflation, as the episode in the 1970s is often called, 
led to radical revisions in macroeconomic thinking. Until then 
Keynesian economists believed that a permanently lower rate of 
unemployment could be achieved by accepting higher inflation. 
Critics of this view, like Milton Friedman and Robert Lucas of the 
University of Chicago, thought differently. In the long run, they ar- 
gued, the unemployment rate was determined by an economy’s 
structural features. A government using easy money to push job- 
lessness below this “natural” level would fail. Instead, inflation 
would accelerate as people learned to expect faster price growth. 

The Great Inflation lent credibility to the critics. But Fried- 
man’s monetarism—the view that inflation in the long run was de- 
termined by growth in the money supply—also proved inade- 
quate. Central banks that tried to target money growth found its 
relationship with inflation to be unstable. They have since been 
guided by a hybrid “New Keynesian” framework, where inflation 
is determined by three main factors: the effects of supply shocks; 
the extent to which the economy is operating above or below ca- 
pacity; and people’s expectations of inflation. The debates around 
the probable trajectory of inflation today hinge on these variables. 

Start first with supply shocks. The current inflation spike is 
clearly rooted in disruptions relating to the messy process of re- 
opening. Supply shocks featured prominently in the Great Infla- 
tion as well, which might suggest that a short-term problem can 
quickly become entrenched. But a closer examination of that epi- 
sode provides some reassurance. Work by Alan Blinder of Prince- 
ton University and Jeremy Rudd of the Federal Reserve suggests 
that the Great Inflation in fact reflected two distinct phenomena: a 


persistent problem of too much demand, overlaid by short bursts 
of supply-side pressures. Shocks to food and energy markets led to 
dramatic spikes in inflation in the 1970s. But Messrs Blinder and 
Rudd point out that inflation quickly dropped when these shocks 
abated. Headline inflation in America rose by nine percentage 
points from 1972 to1974, but by 1976 had fallen by seven percentage 
points. That suggests that supply pressures today should ease 
when disruptions are resolved. 

An economy that is operating beyond its capacity could per- 
haps create more enduring inflation problems. Here again history 
is instructive. Inflation had been creeping up in America well be- 
fore the 1970S, rising from less than 2% in the early 1960s to nearly 
6% later in the decade. That was the result of a policy error: the Fed 
consistently let demand exceed productive capacity. Why it did so 
remains the subject of debate. It may have failed to grasp that pro- 
ductivity growth was slowing, thereby overestimating the econ- 
omy’s potential. Or it may have been reluctant to incur the social 
or political costs of inducing unemployment to rein in inflation. It 
took the grim determination of Paul Volcker, who became the 
Fed’s chairman in 1979, to expunge this inflationary inertia. 

Some economists worry that today’s stimulus-powered growth 
could lead to a repeat of the errors of the past. Employment in 
America remains nearly 8m short of its pre-pandemic level, point- 
ing to plenty of spare capacity. But even the Fed reckons that this 
might quickly be hoovered up, with unemployment falling below 
its long-run rate by the end of 2022. Yet though the disappearance 
of slack could add to inflation pressures, it may not do so by very 
much: shifts in unemployment seem to have had smaller effects 
on inflation in recent decades. In fact, research by Jonathon Hazell 
of Princeton University, Juan Herreno of Columbia University and 
Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson of the University of California, 
Berkeley, suggests that this phenomenon may not be new. They 
find that the relationship between unemployment and inflation 
has been fairly weak across American States since at least the late 
1970S. The drop in inflation that occurred on Volcker’s watch owed 
less to high unemployment, they argue, than toa profound shiftin 
the public’s inflation expectations. 


What to expect when you’ re not expecting 

Expectations are the trickiest piece of the inflation equation. Mea- 
Surement is one problem. A survey by the University of Michigan 
suggests that consumers expect average annual inflation of 3.1% 
over the next five years; market-based measures imply a rate of 
about 2.6% over the same period, before falling to about 2.2% over 
the subsequent five years. That is above the Fed’s 2% target but still 
well short of a1970s-style rerun. Perhaps punters are less worried 
about price pressures. Or perhaps they trust in the Fed’s commit- 
ment to price stability. Mr Hazell and his co-authors posit that in- 
flation expectations dropped dramatically in the early 1980s be- 
cause the public perceived a “regime shift” at the Fed. A repeat of 
the Great Inflation, then, might require another big change to cen- 
tral banks’ frameworks, and time for the public to perceive it. 

Is such an about-face imminent? The Fed recently amended its 
approach, and says it will accept periods of above-target inflation 
to offset past undershooting. Whether this represents a “regime 
shift” is another question. The Fed still promises inflation of just 
2% on average. It has not dropped its commitment to keep control 
over prices, nor does the public believe it has. Middle-aged Amer- 
icans may get a taste of modestly high inflation this year. But they 
are hardly returning to the economy oftheir parents. @ 





Surface to air 


Improving the ventilation of buildings will help curb the spread of SARS-Cov-2 


N JANUARY 24TH 2020 three families, 

together numbering 21 people, came 
independently to eat lunch at a restaurant 
in Guangzhou. It was the eve of the Chinese 
New Year. Extra seating had been squeezed 
in to accommodate more patrons than 
usual, and these families were crowded 
onto neighbouring tables along one wall of 
the windowless room (see plan on a fol- 
lowing page). The largest of them—a party 
of ten who had arrived the day before from 
Wuhan—sat around the middle table. Later 
that day, one of their number developed fe- 
ver and a cough and, at a hospital, was di- 
agnosed with covid-19. Within two weeks, 
ten of the 21 were confirmed as being in- 
fected with SARS-COV-2. 

The families involved had never met 
and video footage showed they had no 
close contact during the lunch. An initial 
analysis by the Guangzhou Centre for Dis- 
ease Control and Prevention proposed that 
the infection had spread via respiratory 
“droplets”. But medical lore has it that such 
droplets—defined as particles expelled 


while breathing that are more than five mi- 
crons across—cannot travel more than a 
couple of metres after they have been ex- 
haled. And some of those who became in- 
fected during the lunch were farther than 
that from the “index” patient. 

It made no sense. How coulda single in- 
fected person transmit the virus to nine 
others in just an hour when there had been 
no direct contact between them? 


Current thinking 

The outbreak at the Guangzhou restaurant 
was the first recorded “superspreading” 
event of the pandemic. Superspreading is 
loosely defined as being when a single per- 
son infects many others in a short space of 





S— 


74 Eunuch GM mosquitoes 




















74 Autonomous weapons problems 


75 Abetter fog trap 


time. More than 2,000 cases of it have now 
been recorded—in places as varied as 
Slaughterhouses, megachurches, fitness 
centres and nightclubs—and many scien- 
tists argue that it is the main means by 
which covid-19 is transmitted. 

In cracking the puzzle of superspread- 
ing, researchers have had to re-evaluate 
their understanding of SARS-COov-2’s trans- 
mission. Most documented superspread- 
ings have happened indoors and involved 
large groups gathered in poorly ventilated 
Spaces. That points to SARS-cov-2 being a 
virus which travels easily through the air, 
in contradistinction to the early belief that 
short-range encounters and infected sur- 
faces were the main risks. This, in turn, 
suggests that paying attention to the need 
for good ventilation will be important in 
managing the next phase of the pandemic, 
as people return to mixing with each other 
inside homes, offices, gyms, restaurants 
and other enclosed spaces. 

It has taken a long time for public- 
health experts to acknowledge that co- 
vid-19 routinely spreads through the air in 
this way. Social distancing and mask-wear- 
ing were recommended with the intention 
of cutting direct, close-range transmission 
by virus-carrying droplets of mucus or sa- 
liva breathed out by infected individuals. 
The main risk of spreading the illness indi- 
rectly was thought to come not from these 
droplets being carried long distances by air 
currents, but rather by their landing on| 


71 


72 Science & technology 


» nearby surfaces, on which viruses they 
were harbouring might survive for hours, 
or even days. Anyone who touched such an 
infected surface could then transfer those 
viruses, via their fingers, to their mouth, 
eyes or nose. This makes sense if SARS- 
COV-2 spreads in the same way as influen- 
Za—which was indeed the hypothesis in 
March 2020, when the World Health Orga- 
nisation (WHO) declared the start of the co- 
vid-19 pandemic. Hence the advice to dis- 
infect surfaces and wash hands frequently. 

Doctors did knowat the time that not all 
respiratory particles fall fast. Those small- 
er than five microns can become aerosols, 
staying aloft for hours and potentially trav- 
elling much farther than droplets, or sim- 
ply accumulating in the air within a closed 
room. Anyone inhaling these aerosols 
could then become infected. But this was 
assumed not to matter, because aerosols 
were thought to be relevant only in special- 
ist medical settings, such as when patients 
are attached to a ventilator in an intensive- 
care unit. Intubation, as this process is 
known, does indeed create aerosols, as the 
breathing tube is forced down a patient’s 
trachea. But a wider risk was not perceived. 
The wHo therefore played down the risks 
of aerosols, issuing guidance via its Twitter 
and Facebook pages at the end of March 
2020 that the general public need not wor- 
ry. “FACT: #COVID19 is NOT airborne,” it 
said, adding that any claims to the contrary 
were “misinformation”. 


Physics envy 
Researchers outside the medical world, 
however—especially those who study the 
physics of particles in the air—felt the evi- 
dence pointed in a different direction. The 
Guangzhou restaurant outbreak was an 
early warning. Around the same time, 
1,300km across the country in Ningbo, 23 
of 68 passengers on a bus fitted with an air- 
recycling system had been infected during 
a one-and-a-half-hour journey. But the 
worst known case of superspreading early 
in the pandemic was American. This hap- 
pened at a choir practice in Skagit Valley, 
Washington State, in March 2020. Of the 61 
people present during a two-and-a-half- 
hour meeting, 53 became infected. In all 
these cases, investigation showed that 
those infected were not necessarily the 
people closest to the index patients, as 
might be expected if transmission had 
been by droplet or surface contact. 

None of this surprised Lidia Morawska, 
a physicist at the Queensland University of 
Technology, in Brisbane, Australia. She had 
Spent much of her career studying how 
pollution caused by so-called particulate 
matter, such as dust and smog, affects air 
quality. After the original SARS outbreak, 
which happened in 2003, she began ex- 
periments to show how respiratory parti- 
cles are generated in people’s throats and 


then transported through the air. 

She demonstrated that received medi- 
cal wisdom is wrong. Because exhaled 
breath is a moist, hot, turbulent cloud of 
air, a five-micron-wide droplet released at 
a height of one and a half metres (about the 
distance above ground of the average 
mouth or nose) can easily be carried doz- 
ens of metres before settling. Also, the gen- 
eration of respiratory particles is not re- 
stricted to medical settings. Liquid drops 
of all sizes—including those defined as 
aerosols—are continuously shed while 
people are breathing, talking, sneezing or 
singing (see chart on this page). 

In July 2020 Dr Morawska wanted to 
bring this work to the attention of public- 
health agencies. She assembled a group of 
36 experts on aerosols and air quality to 
write an open letter outlining their evi- 
dence for infection by smaller liquid drops 
and calling on the WHO to change its tune 
on airborne transmission. “We appeal to 
the medical community and to the rele- 
vant national and international bodies to 
recognise the potential for airborne spread 
of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19),’ 
they wrote in Clinical Infectious Diseases. 
“There is significant potential for inhala- 
tion exposure to viruses in microscopic 
respiratory droplets (microdroplets) at 
short to medium distances (up to several 
metres, or room scale), and we are advocat- 
ing for the use of preventive measures to 
mitigate this route of airborne transmis- 
sion.” More than 200 other researchers 
from 32 countries also signed the letter. 

One signatory was Jose-Luis Jimenez, 
an atmospheric chemist at the University 
of Colorado, Boulder. He says that the con- 
fusion in health circles over whether or not 
airborne transmission of SARS-COV-2 is im- 
portant can be traced back to medical text- 
books that still contain outdated descrip- 
tions of how respiratory particles are pro- 
duced and move. 

But the widespread assertion, still stub- 
bornly promulgated by the wHo, that dro- 
plets above five microns in diameter do 


aa 

A problem of aerosols 

Distribution in sizes of particles emitted by a 
single infectious person, parts per quadrillion 


250 


200 





Droplet radius, microns 


Source: ‘A guideline to limit indoor airborne transmission 
of covid-19", by M.Z. Bazant and J.W.M. Bush, PNAS, 2021 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


not stay airborne, but rather settle close to 
their source, is a dodgy foundation on 
which to build public-health advice. Ac- 
cording to Dr Jimenez, physicists have 
shown that any particle less than 100 mi- 
crons across can become airborne in the 
right circumstances. All of this matters be- 
cause hand-washing and social distanc- 
ing, though they remain important, are not 
enough to stop an airborne virus spread- 
ing, especially indoors. Masks will help, by 
slowing down and partially filtering an in- 
fectious person’s exhalations. But to keep 
offices, schools, hospitals, care homes and 
so on Safe also requires improvements in 
their ventilation. 


Fan-tastic 

Under pressure from physicists, the WHO 
recently acknowledged that better ventila- 
tion should be used to help prevent co- 
vid-19’s spread—and in March it published 
a “roadmap” to that effect. But the docu- 
ment fell far short of properly recognising 
the hazard of airborne transmission and, 
therefore, the need to control it. Despite 
overwhelming evidence that it happens, 
the agency still maintained that SARS- 
COV-2 “mainly spreads between people 
when an infected person is in close contact 
with another person”. 

Others, though, are acting on the new 
knowledge. Martin Bazant, a chemical en- 
gineer, and John Bush, a mathematician, 
both at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, have devised a way to calcu- 
late how long it would be safe to stay with- 
inaroom that contains an infected person. 
The pair described their model in a paper 
in a recent issue of the Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences. 

Applied to a typical American school 
class of 19 pupils and a teacher, the safe 
time after an infected individual enters a 
classroom that is naturally ventilated (that 
is, how long before the risk of infection is 
unacceptably high) is 72 minutes. This per- 
iod can, though, be extended in two ways. 
One is by mechanical ventilation of the 
room, which increases the safe time to 7.2 
hours. The other is by everyone wearing 
masks. In the absence of mechanical venti- 
lation, mask-wearing increases the safe 
time to eight hours. But the real benefit 
comes from combining these approaches. 
That pushes the safe time up to 80 hours— 
almost 14 days if a school day is six hours 
long. Add in intervening weekends anda 
class wearing masks in a school room with 
adequate ventilation would thereby be safe 
for longer than the time it takes to recover 
from covid-19, which is typically between 
one and two weeks. School transmissions 
would thus be rare. 

A caveat is that the modelling assumed 
a classroom with minimal talking, physi- 
cal activity or singing by the pupils. But 
games lessons would usually be outdoors b> 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


>and singing lessons could be. As to too 
much talking, teachers might welcome an 
unimpeachable reason to tell pupils to 
keep quiet in class. 

Infection risk will not always be distri- 
buted evenly around a room. Jiarong Hong, 
a mechanical engineer at the University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, therefore used 
computer models to study how aerosols 
would spread in a classroom, according to 
the location of an infected individual and 
the position of nearby fans or air filters. As- 
Suming the teacher was infected, and so 
was releasing virus-laden aerosols at the 
front of the class, Dr Hong’s modelling 
shows that placing an air cleaner or extrac- 
tor fan at the front of the room sets up an 
airflow which prevents the movement of 
such aerosols towards the pupils. An even 
better aerosol-cleansing effect is achieved 
when the fans and filters are elevated 
above the people in the room. This takes 
advantage of the rising air plumes created 
by body heat, which mean that exhaled 
aerosols tend to float upwards. Dr Hong’s 
modelling shows that even small, cheap 
box fans mounted in this way would doa 
good job of keeping classrooms safe and 
preventing aerosols from building up to 
dangerous levels. 

Dr Hong has also modelled the air flow 
in the Guangzhou restaurant outbreak of 
January 2020. As the plan shows, he found 
that the movements of virus-laden aero- 
sols around the three affected families of 
diners matched the seating positions of 
the people who eventually became sick. 
The outbreak occurred because there was 
no source of external fresh air and a nearby 
recirculating air conditioner redistributed 
aerosols from the infected person to the 
other tables, creating a contaminated bub- 
ble of air that was increasingly burdened 
with viruses over the course of the lunch. 

The risk, then, is real. But how can the 
occupants of a room know whether it is 
well-ventilated? Just because a room feels 
Spacious and an air conditioner is operat- 
ing does not mean the air inside it is clean. 

Here, Dr Morawska has a suggestion. In 
a (non-scientific) experiment last year, she 
took a carbon-dioxide meter into a large, 
high-ceilinged, air-conditioned restaurant 
near her home. CO, concentrations can be 
a useful proxy for clean air. Outdoor air 
contains around 400 parts per million 
(ppm) of the gas, and people's exhaled 
breath contains around 40,oo0oppm. Ex- 
haling into aroom therefore gradually rais- 
es its CO, concentration unless the ventila- 
tion is good enough to remove the excess. 

According to experts on air quality, any- 
thing below 500ppm in a room means the 
ventilation is good. At 800ppm, 1% of the 
air someone is breathing has already been 
exhaled recently by someone else. At 
4,400ppm, this rises to 10%, and would be 
classed as dangerous. These sorts of levels 





are seen only in crowded spaces with poor 
airflow. To keep the risk of covid-19 low, 
CO, levels should be well below 700ppm. 

When Dr Morawska conducted her ex- 
periment, the restaurant had ten people in 
it—far fewer than would normally be al- 
lowed—and the CO, concentration was al- 
ready 1,000ppm when she arrived. Within 
an hour it had jumped to 2,000ppm. “We 
continued sitting during the dinner for an- 
other hour or so,” she says. “So if there was 
someone infected there, well this could 
have been a problem.” 

Though anecdotal, that tale indicates a 
serious risk—and one which resonates be- 
yond covid-19. All sorts of symptoms, from 
headaches, fatigue and shortness of breath 
to skin-irritation, dizziness and nausea, 
are linked to poor ventilation. It has also 
been connected with more absences from 
work and lower productivity. 

The ventilation measures needed to 
deal with all this are not difficult, but exist- 
ing regulations and design standards often 
have different objectives—particularly, 
these days, conserving heat and thus re- 
ducing energy consumption. That often 
means recirculating air, rather than ex- 
changing it with fresh air from the outside 


Say 
Spreading risk 


Science & technology 73 


world. (An exception is passenger aircraft, 
which refresh cabin air frequently.) 

In situations where it is not possible to 
reduce health risks by ventilation alone— 
for example, places like nightclubs, where 
there are lots of people crowded together, 
or gyms, where they are breathing heavi- 
ly—air filtration could easily be incorpo- 
rated into ventilation systems. Air could 
also be disinfected, using germicidal ultra- 
violet lamps placed within air-condition- 
ing systems or near ceilings in rooms. 


All change 

And then there is public awareness. “Be- 
fore this pandemic it was completely so- 
cially acceptable to come to the office 
coughing, sneezing, spreading viruses 
around,’ says Dr Morawska. “No one would 
say anything—even people educated to un- 
derstand how infections are transmitted.” 

That insouciance must be corrected, 
she says. The WHO must acknowledge the 
need to control airborne pathogens and 
governments must agree and enforce com- 
prehensive standards for indoor air quality 
that keeps people healthy. One way to en- 
sure compliance might be to issue ventila- 
tion certificates for buildings, similar to 
the food-hygiene certificates which alrea- 
dy exist for restaurants. Occupants should 
also be given information about air quality 
routinely, she adds, through the use of 
monitors and sensors that can display a 
room's carbon-dioxide levels or other rele- 
vant measures. 

For new buildings this should not cost 
much extra, though replacing exiting ven- 
tilation systems might be costly. But not as 
costly as covid-i9 has been. And if im- 
provements in indoor air quality also re- 
duced absenteeism and improved produc- 
tivity, those gains might cover that cost. 
“Although detailed economic analyses re- 
main to be done,” wrote Dr Morawska ina 
recent edition of Science, “the existing evi- 
dence suggests that controlling airborne 
infections can cost society less than it 
would to bearthem.” @ 


Suspected airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in a restaurant in Guangzhou, China 


Modelled airflow 


= =< 
Door 7 = “ 
- 
Pi 
— —¥; : 
Patrons on 
January 24th 2020 1 
&4 Index case Catering } 
’™) Became infected Toilet 
~~ No infection 
Air con. 


a a 


A re 


is aaa taf taf ae 


Empty a 
Exhaust fans closed 


38 


-— Closed-circulation 
bubble around 
index case 


Column 





[a 


Source: “Probable airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in a poorly ventilated restaurant”, by Y. Li et al., Building and Environment, 2021 


714 


Science & technology 


Pest control 


Cas-9-trated 


Genetic engineering may help control 
disease-carrying mosquitoes 


VERY YEAR, hundreds of millions of 
| cen catch mosquito-borne diseases 
like malaria and dengue fever. Hundreds of 
thousands die. Drug treatments are imper- 
fect. And, despite decades of effort, vac- 
cines have, for many of these diseases, 
proved tricky to develop. 

Better, then, to stop those infections 
happening in the first place, by extermi- 
nating—or at least suppressing—the mos- 
quitoes that carry the diseases. In a paper 
just published in the Proceedings of the Na- 
tional Academy of Sciences, a team of re- 
searchers led by Craig Montell, of the Uni- 
versity of California, Santa Barbara, de- 
scribe how CRISPR-Cas9g, a new and power- 
ful genetic-engineering process, could 
help to do just that. 

Dr Montell and his colleagues used 
CRISPR to boost an existing control meth- 
od called the sterile insect technique (SIT). 
This involves releasing lots of sterilised 
males into the wild. Females that mate 
with these males produce no offspring. Re- 
peated releases can reduce populations 
dramatically. sir has been used in North 
America to eliminate screwworm flies, an 
agricultural pest, and to suppress several 
species of crop-munching fruit flies. 

It has been tried on mosquitoes, too, 
but with less success. One reason seems to 
be side-effects of the procedure. To steril- 
ise them, males are zapped with radiation 
or exposed to toxic chemicals. This works, 
but it damages them in other ways, too. 
The result can be sickly individuals that 
struggle to compete in the mating game 
with their wild counterparts. 

Dr Montell and his colleagues hoped 
that CRISPR might offer an alternative. 
Their first step was to look for genes which, 
when disabled, would render male mos- 
quitoes infertile. They began their hunt in 
fruit flies, a stalwart of genetic research. 
They focused on a gene that, when re- 
moved, made male fruit flies sterile—and 
which was present in a similar form in 
their target mosquito species, Aedes aegyp- 
ti, which is the vector of, among other ill- 
nesses, yellow fever, dengue and Zika vi- 
rus. Disabling the equivalent gene in male 
Aedes likewise left them infertile. 

Crucially, the genetic tweak involved 
did not appear to hinder the modified mos- 
quitoes in any other way. On every measure 
of healthiness they performed as well as 
their wild counterparts. And even though 
they were firing blanks, they were still able 





Father of none 


to mate with females in the laboratory. 

Although the details are not fully un- 
derstood, says Dr Montell, once female 
mosquitoes have mated a few times, they 
become less receptive to doing so again. 
Mating with an infertile male is therefore 
not only fruitless in itself, but should also 
leave a female less interested in unmodi- 
fied males in future. Sure enough, a series 
of experiments conducted in cages sug- 
gested that releasing between five and six 
genetically modified males for each wild 
male was enough to cut the number of re- 
producing females by half. Upping that ra- 
tio to 15:1 dropped it by 80%. 

There is more work to do before field 
trials, says Dr Montell. But having estab- 
lished the principle, he is excited to see 
where the work might lead. That the target 
gene is found in both fruit flies and Aedes 
suggests it is likely to exist in other dis- 
ease-carrying mosquitoes, too. And that 
the engineered males leave no offspring 
means fewer worries about any unintend- 
ed consequences which might arise from 
releasing millions of genetically modified 
organisms into the environment. 

More speculatively, the team is ponder- 
ing whether it might be possible to create 
males which can outplay their un-engi- 
neered cousins at the mating game, de- 
spite being infertile. Improving on mil- 
lions of years of evolution would usually 
be hard. Even if researchers could find an 
alteration that improved a male's attrac- 
tiveness, it would probably reduce the ani- 
mal’s overall fitness. Such a genetic tweak 
would ordinarily be winnowed out by nat- 
ural selection over subsequent genera- 
tions. But because each generation of 
males is created anew in a laboratory, says 
Dr Montell, there is no long run to worry 
about. If the team can find the right muta- 
tion, such genetically engineered hommes 
fatales could give mosquito-suppression 
efforts an even bigger boost. 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


Autonomous weapons 


Fail deadly 


The fog of war may confound weapons 
that think for themselves 


HE SKIES of Israel have lit up in recent 

weeks with the sinuous trails of inter- 
ceptors colliding with thick volleys of 
rockets fired from Gaza. These spectacular 
aerial duels show autonomous weapons at 
work. For, though each launcher of Iron 
Dome, Israel’s missile-defence system, is 
manned by soldiers, only a computer can 
keep up with the most intense barrages. 
“Sometimes in large salvos, you can't have 
men in the loop for every rocket,” says one 
Israeli soldier. It is largely an algorithm 
that decides where and when to fire. 

Iron Dome is a defensive system that at- 
tacks physical objects (the incoming rock- 
ets) in an aerial battle-theatre devoid of 
immediate civilian bystanders, albeit that 
falling debris could injure or kill someone. 
But one day similar latitude might be given 
to offensive weapons which fire at human 
enemies on the ground, in more crowded 
places. A new report by the United Nations 
Institute for Disarmament Research (UN- 
IDIR), a think-tank, explains why that will 
be far harder than knocking rockets out of 
the sky. 

Autonomous systems rely on artificial 
intelligence (AI), which in turn relies on 
data collected from those systems’ sur- 
roundings. When these data are good— 
plentiful, reliable and similar to the data 
on which the system’s algorithm was 
trained—AI can excel. But in many circum- 
stances data are incomplete, ambiguous or 
overwhelming. Consider the difference be- 
tween radiology, in which algorithms out- 
perform human beings in analysing x-ray 
images, and self-driving cars, which still 
struggle to make sense of a cacophonous 
stream of disparate inputs from the out- 
side world. On the battlefield, that problem 
is multiplied. 

“Conflict environments are harsh, dy- 
namic and adversarial,” sayS UNIDIR. Dust, 
smoke and vibration can obscure or dam- 
age the cameras, radars and other sensors 
that capture data in the first place. Even a 
speck of dust on asensor might, ina partic- 
ular light, mislead an algorithm into clas- 
sifying a civilian object as a military one, 
says Arthur Holland Michel, the report’s 
author. Moreover, enemies constantly at- 
tempt to fool those sensors through cam- 
ouflage, concealment and trickery. Pedes- 
trians have no reason to bamboozle self- 
driving cars, whereas soldiers work hard to 
blend into foliage. And a mixture of civil- 
ian and military objects—evident on the >> 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


> ground in Gaza in recent weeks—could 
produce a flood of confusing data. 

The biggest problem is that algorithms 
trained on limited data samples would en- 
counter a much wider range of inputs ina 
war zone. In the same way that recognition 
software trained largely on white faces 
struggles to recognise black ones, an au- 
tonomous weapon fed with examples of 
Russian military uniforms will be less reli- 
able against Chinese ones. “AI systems 
tend to be very brittle against anything that 
wasn't covered in their development or 
testing,’ says Mr Holland Michel. An au- 
tonomous system effective against one 
country might be unusable against a foe 
with superior camouflage, for instance. 

Despite these limitations, the technolo- 
gy is already trickling onto the battlefield. 
In its war with Armenia last year, Azerbai- 
jan unleashed Israeli-made loitering mu- 
nitions theoretically capable of choosing 
their own targets. Ziyan, a Chinese compa- 
ny, boasts that its Blowfish A3, a gun-toting 
helicopter drone, “autonomously per- 
forms...complex combat missions” in- 
cluding “targeted precision strikes”. The 
International Committee of the Red Cross 
(ICRC) says that many of today’s remote- 
controlled weapons could be turned into 
autonomous ones with little more than a 
software upgrade or a change of doctrine. 


The limits of autonomy 
On May 12th the Icrc published a new and 
nuanced position on the matter, recom- 
mending new rules to regulate autono- 
mous weapons, including a prohibition on 
those that are “unpredictable”, and also a 
blanket ban on any such weapon that has 
human beings as its targets. These things 
will be debated in December at the five- 
yearly review conference of the UN Con- 
vention on Certain Conventional Weap- 
ons, originally established in 1980 to ban 
landmines and other “inhumane” arms. 
Government experts will meet thrice over 
the summer and autumn, under UN aus- 
pices, to lay the groundwork. “There is mo- 
mentum now towards a decision,’ says 
Neil Davison, a scientific and policy advis- 
er at the ICRC. Even among states who op- 
pose new rules, he says, there is greater 
discussion of the limits that might need to 
be placed on autonomous weapons. 

Yet powerful states remain wary of ced- 
ing an advantage to rivals. In March a Na- 
tional Security Commission on Artificial 
Intelligence established by America’s Con- 
gress predicted that autonomous weapons 
would eventually be “capable of levels of 
performance, speed and discrimination 
that exceed human capabilities”. A world- 
wide prohibition on their development 
and use would be “neither feasible nor cur- 
rently in the interests of the United States,” 
it concluded—in part, it argued, because 
Russia and China would probably cheat. 





Water supply 


A better fog trap 


Science & technology 75 


A clever upgrade of a humble but useful technology 


VERY NIGHT, air cooled and moistened 

by the Humboldt current blows over 
Chile’s northern coast and across the Ata- 
cama desert. The billowing banks of fog 
thus created might look insubstantial, but 
there is water here to be captured—and in 
this, the driest place on Earth, capture it 
people do. Fog-harvesting will never be big 
business, for it needs particular conditions 
to operate well. But in zones like the Ataca- 
ma, where moisture-laden breezes bring 
fog but no rain, the invention in the 1960s 
of traps which can pluck that moisture 
from the air has helped sustain settle- 
ments otherwise on the brink of drought. 

Fog traps are polymer-mesh screens 
mounted in metal frames (See picture). As 
misty zephyrs blow through them, drop- 
lets of water adhere to the mesh. These ab- 
sorb others until the result breaks free and 
runs down the screen, as a raindrop runs 
down a window pane, into a collector. A 
typical trap, with a 40-square-metre col- 
lecting area, yields about 200 litres a day. 
That is enough to supply around 60 people 
with drinking water. Such a collector costs 
$1,000 oF SO, and will last a decade. 

A simple idea, then. But even simple 
technology can be upgraded. And that is 
exactly what Urszula Stachewicz of the 
AGH University of Science and Technology, 
in Krakow, Poland, proposes to do. 

Her upgrade relies on giving the mesha 
slight electrical charge. Overall, the mole- 
cules in it are electrically neutral. But po- 
lymer molecules are large, and their elec- 





The mellow fruitfulness of mists 


trons can move about within them. Un- 
even distribution of these electrons means 
some parts of a molecule are positive and 
some negative. That fact might be exploit- 
ed to give the outside of each thread ina 
mesh one electrical polarity (either posi- 
tive or negative) while burying the other 
polarity in the thread’s interior. Just as stat- 
ic electricity will attract a balloon to a wall, 
a surface charge created in this way will at- 
tract water droplets from the air. 

Previous attempts to do this have coat- 
ed the threads with metal. But that is ex- 
pensive. As they describe in Acs Nano, Dr 
Stachewicz and her student Daniel Ura 
have done it by changing the way the 
threads are spun, which is cheap. 

At the moment, those threads are creat- 
ed by a process called melt-spinning. This 
involves melting the polymer and pushing 
the resulting liquid through a hollow nee- 
dle, out of a hole in the needle’s tip and on- 
to aspinning drum, where it cools and so- 
lidifies. Dr Stachewicz and Mr Ura propose 
instead to use a technique called electro- 
Spinning. This also involves a hollow nee- 
dle. But instead of being melted, the po- 
lymer is dissolved in a solvent, and instead 
of being propelled from the needle’s tip by 
pressure from behind, it is attracted to the 
drum by the creation of an electrical poten- 
tial difference between the drum and the 
needle. As the stream of dissolved polymer 
travels through the air, the solvent evapo- 
rates, leaving behind a solid thread. 

One consequence of electrospinning is 
that the voltage attracting the thread from 
needle to drum also attracts or repels, ac- 
cording to their polarity, the charges on the 
molecules within. This reorients those 
molecules, aligning them (and thus their 
charges) ina way that does not happenina 
melt-spun thread. That can create the sort 
of polarity difference between the interior 
and the exterior of a thread the two re- 
searchers were looking for. 

Dr Stachewicz and Mr Ura experiment- 
ed with different potential differences be- 
tween needle and drum and eventually 
found one that resulted in meshes able to 
collect 50% more water than commercial 
versions, at no extra cost of production. At 
the moment these are just prototypes, but 
they expect soon to have a practical version 
which can be made available for sale. And 
that will certainly improve the lives of peo- 
ple who rely for their survival on drawing 
water not from a well, but from thin air. & 


76 


flies 
| 


| ee ee 


bes 
i 


by ei, 


Ss 

| * 

‘-) 

ae a4 . 

My ye J lies 
| 1 “ a! i 

- “ersVvvm a > 
, } 7 i — 
j ee " - 
| 
rs i 
4 


Secrets and lies 


A Russian author explores her family’s past and the meaning of history 


S A CHILD, Maria Stepanova adored a 
Agame called sekretiki, or “little secrets”. 
She would dig holes in the ground, line 
them with foil, fill them with special ob- 
jects, cover them with glass and bury them 
in the dirt, to be found by friends in the 
know. As she grew up to become one of 
Russia’s most celebrated contemporary po- 
ets, writing came to play a similar role in 
her life. “I begin to love someone or some- 
thing, information accumulates of its own 
accord, and I want to write about it, to put 
that material into a storehouse, to find its 
unexpected rhythms,” she explains from 
Moscow. “I want to make a sekretik.” 

Ms Stepanova’s deepest love is for the 
past, in particular her own family’s, and 
her luminous book “In Memory of Memo- 
ry’ is a sekretik devoted to them. After in- 
heriting an archive of her ancestors’ photo- 
graphs, letters and ephemera, she set out to 
make sense of the family’s history, traips- 
ing from Paris to Saratov on the Volga and 
roaming across art, literature and philoso- 
phy. Eschewing the traditional quest narra- 
tive, she blends memoir, criticism, essay, 


In Memory of Memory. By Maria 
Stepanova. Translated by Sasha Dugdale. 
New Directions; 400 pages; $19.95. 
Fitzcarraldo Editions; £14.99 


documentary and travelogue. The book 
won several literary awards in Russia; on 
reading it, thinks Yury Saprykin, the foun- 
der of Polka, a Russian literary website, 
“You immediately feel that you are en- 
countering a great work of art.’ In Sasha 
Dugdale’s supple English translation, itisa 
contender for this year’s International 
Booker Prize, to be awarded on June 2nd. 
The story of the author’s Russian-Jew- 
ish family is not the stuff of headlines. 


77 Satirical fiction 
78 The denizens of Prague 
78 Ahistory of censorship 


79 Streaming Persian music 





“Everyone else’s ancestors had taken part 
in history, but mine seemed to have been 
mere lodgers in history’s house,” Ms Stepa- 
nova writes, confessing “embarrassment” 
at how seemingly banal their lives were. 
Her relatives had bit parts in the grand nar- 
ratives of the 2oth century, skirting its 
catastrophes. And the archive raises as ma- 
ny questions as it answers; her attempts to 
fill in the lacunae leave her with only “the 
tongue-twister of my aunts’ names Sanya, 
Sonya, Soka, a lot of photographs of the 
nameless and the noteless, some ethereal 
and unattached anecdotes and the familiar 
faces of unfamiliar people”. 

In other hands, such material might fall 
flat. Ms Stepanova’s learning and lyricism 
bring it to life. She hears stories about her 
great-grandmother Sarra that have “the 
laurel-leaf taste of legend”. She sees hills 
“the colour of dark copper, rising and fall- 
ing as evenly as breath”, and blackened vil- 
lages where new churches gleam “white as 
new crowns on old teeth”. 

Little escapes her meditative gaze. “I 
wanted to create a book with many entry- 
ways and exits,’ Ms Stepanova says. She 
muses on everything from vintage cloth- 
ing to the selfie, from the French philoso- 
pher Jacques Rancieére to the American art- 
ist Joseph Cornell to the Russian poet Gri- 
gory Dashevsky. In a particularly thought- 
provoking chapter, she brings the Russian 
writers Osip Mandelstam and Marina Tsve- 
taeva into conversation with the German 
author W.G. Sebald. She tests out meta-| 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


» phors for memory and methods for enliv- 
ening archival material, weaving excerpts 
of relatives’ letters throughout the book. 
Some readers may choke on this allusive 
style, as if drinking from a dusty old glass. 
Many will find it intoxicating. 


Speak, memory 

The myriad references to other thinkers 
serve a purpose: to weave Russia back into 
the wider Western cultural fabric. As Ms 
Stepanova sees it, in thei9th and early 2oth 
centuries Russian culture was part of a 
shared dialogue and exchange of ideas. Her 
search for traces of her great-grandmother 
leads her to Paris, where Sarra studied 
medicine in the 1910s—as Franz Kafka and 
Amedeo Modigliani were roaming the 
Same city’s streets. 

But from the late 1930s an “invisible 
curtain” divided Russian culture from the 
West, Ms Stepanova says, and the country 
became an “exporter of a kind of borderline 
experience’. Its literature, from Alexander 
Solzhenitsyn to Varlam Shalamov, came to 
be seen primarily as “confessional or re- 
portorial material”. By linking writers from 
across that curtain, she aims to refute the 
idea that the Russian experience is sep- 
arate and unique. A passage in which she 
visits a museum in New York evokes this 
sense of connection. Coming upon an im- 
age of autumn woods, “I begin to cry, very 
quietly, under my breath, because it’s the 
very Same Moscow wood where I used to 
walk with my parents once, many thou- 
sands of miles ago, and we are now looking 
at each other again.” As Mr Saprykin puts it, 
the book “returns us to the sensation of 
Russia being a part of world culture’. 

Struggles over memory, Ms Stepanova 
notes, are not exclusive to Russia. In essays 
elsewhere, she reflected on the appeals to 
past greatness that, in 2014, fuelled Rus- 
Sla’s war with Ukraine; her observations 
could just as well apply to the rhetoric of 
Trump-era America and Brexit Britain. 
“The virus has somehow spread around the 
world,’ she laments. (Her output is formid- 
able. She is editor-in-chief of Colta.ru, an 
online cultural journal; a collection of her 
essays and verse has been published this 
year as “The Voice Over”; another book of 
poetry is out in English as “War of the 
Beasts and the Animals”.) 

When the past is prosecuted in this way, 
suggests Ms Stepanova, it becomes an op- 
portunity “for settling scores, for a kind of 
conversation about the present that for 
some reason cannot happen in real time”. 
This seepage across time is the underlying 
theme of “In Memory of Memory’, says 
Stanislav Lvovsky, a Russian poet and crit- 
ic: “It’s not a story about history, but about 
how the past lives on in the present.” 

These disparate battles over memory 
may be part of the same war, but in Russia 
they tend to rage at a higher pitch. Her 


country, Ms Stepanova says, has long had 
competing channels for memory: an offi- 
cial, state-endorsed narrative, and family 
stories, which “like lace, have more holes 
than threads”. Vladimir Putin has made a 
glorious version of the past, in particular 
victory in the second world war, a pillar of 
his statist ideology. Last week, in a meeting 
with senior officials, Mr Putin declared 
that “all kinds of Russophobic individuals 
and unscrupulous politicians are trying to 
attack Russian history”. He promised “to 
ensure the continuity of historical memo- 
ry in Russian society, so that decades and 
centuries from now, future generations 
will cherish the truth about the war”. 


Books & arts 77 


Ms Stepanova makes the dissonance 
between these ways of thinking clear ina 
poignant chapter about the siege of Lenin- 
grad. A distant relative of hers perished in 
battle there, writing quaint letters home 
until his death. She quotes Lydia Ginzburg, 
a critic who noted from behind the Nazi 
blockade how the Soviet system “dehu- 
manised the individual to such an extent 
that he had learnt to sacrifice himself with- 
out even realising it”. 

By contrast, Ms Stepanova imbues indi- 
vidual lives with meaning independent of 
the collective fate. For her, writing “is al- 
ways a rescue operation”. Her family’s rel- 
ics are Safely preserved in their sekretik. & 


The hard sell 


Black Buck. By Mateo Askaripour. 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt; 400 pages; $26. 
John Murray; £14.99 


RUE TO HIS name, Darren Vender is a 

A eee In the opening pages of 
“Black Buck”, Mateo Askaripour’s 

sprightly yet savage debut novel, Darren 
is doling out Grasshopper Frappuccinos 
at a Starbucks in Manhattan. After four 
years he has earned the black apron ofa 
coffee master; but as former valedictori- 
an of his class at a prestigious high 
school in the Bronx, he knows that ajob 
pulling shots doesn’t amount to much. 
Then he upsells a new drink to Rhett, a 
regular customer—and is invited to work 
at Rhett’s company. “Once you learn how 
to sell, to truly sell, anything is possible,” 
Darren says. But is it? 

Mr Askaripour’s satire of the tech 


+ J rf : “ 





Tales of the city 











industry—and of the intersection be- 
tween capitalism and American racial 
politics—will appeal to fans of Paul 
Beatty’s Booker-prizewinning novel “The 
Sellout” and Jordan Peele’s film “Get Out”. 
When Darren joins Sumwun—a startup 
hawking online therapy to big compan- 
ies that want to be seen as caring em- 
ployers—he is immediately renamed 
Buck. “If he does his job, he’ll make us 
each a million bucks,” explains Rhett’s 
colleague Clyde, winkingly. 

But Darren is the only black person in 
the team, and the nickname also sug- 
gests a dehumanising racial stereotype. 
Colleagues tell him that he resembles 
Sidney Poitier or Martin Luther King or 
Malcolm X. Mr Askaripour’s white char- 
acters are terrifyingly comfortable in 
their privilege. “I knew you looked famil- 
lar,’ says Clyde, “but I wasn’t sure if it was 
in the way most black people look alike. 
Not ina racist way, of course.” 

Every day Darren—who comes to call 
and think of himself as Buck—rides the 
subway in from Bedford-Stuyvesant in 
Brooklyn. Perhaps the novel maps the 
psychic distance between the narrator’s 
old and new lives too bluntly, but that is 
the nature of raw satire such as this. In 
their earnestness, the self-improvement 
aphorisms that salt the text in bold type 
help to humanise Darren’s striving: 
“Reader: No matter how much it hurts, 
never let short-term frustration disrupt 
long-term gain.’ The denouement is 
unexpectedly shocking. 

It would be wishful thinking to find 
Mr Askaripour’s take on the world totally 
incredible. “I know. The turns in this 
story are half absurd, half jaw-dropping, 
and a whole heaping of crazy,’ Darren 
says. The other half 1s all too real. 


78 Books & arts 


Urban life 
Czechs and 
balances 





Prague: Belonging in the Modern City. By 
Chad Bryant. Harvard University Press; 352 
pages; $29.95 and £23.95 


HE WAS in many ways a quintessential 

local. She had Czech friends, read Czech 
books and ate that Bohemian staple, pota- 
toes. But Duong Nguyen Jiraskova, a stu- 
dent who in 2008 began blogging about life 
in Prague, was also untypical. Brought up 
in the Czech Republic by Vietnamese par- 
ents, she straddled two worlds. She cele- 
brated Christmas—and Tet. She used cut- 
lery, but taught friends to handle chop- 
sticks. “Whenever someone asks me where 
I feel at home,” she wrote, “I never give a 
one-word answer.” 

One-word answers do not feature in 
this subtle, lyrical book. Like the denizens 
of many other cities, Praguers have juggled 
identities for centuries, even if they have 
only recently chronicled their efforts on- 
line. Chad Bryant concentrates on five 
fascinating individuals, guiding readers 
through Czech history along the way. 

He begins in the mid-19th century, 
when Prague was a Habsburg city and Ger- 
man dominated high culture. That was in- 
tolerable for Slav patriots such as Karel Zap, 
who saw Prague as a kind of Czech Rome; 
Zap advocated the use of the Czech lan- 
guage and highlighted the glories of Czech 
culture. He thought only those with a 
“heightened sense of religiosity and na- 
tional feeling” should enter St Vitus Cathe- 
dral, final resting place of Bohemian kings. 

Yet for all his zeal, Zap sometimes wrote 
in German—and once went by the Teuton- 


A view from the brid ge 


ic-sounding Karl Zapp. Mr Bryant threads 
such ironies through his book, describing 
people on the fringes of Prague society who 
stumbled towards belonging. In the inter- 
War years, when the city was becoming 
thoroughly Czech, Egon Kisch, a German- 
speaking Jewish journalist, explored soup 
kitchens and dive bars that recalled the 
cosmopolitan mood of earlier decades. Ha- 
na Frejkova found peace as an actor in 
Czechoslovakia’s theatres after her father 
was condemned in a Stalinist show trial. 

Vignettes evoke the city’s changing for- 
tunes. In Kisch’s day Prague had official 
dogcatchers, one of them boasting an 18th- 
century proclamation from Empress Maria 
Theresa confirming his family’s hereditary 
profession. By the 1970s Prague was a striv- 
ing socialist city, complete with tower 
blocks and a new metro system. When the 
first line opened, officials hired women 
workers to help Praguers navigate an unfa- 
miliar technology—escalators. 

As Mr Bryant makes clear, Prague has 
for centuries been a city in flux, each new 
ruler chiselling his politics into its institu- 
tions and infrastructure. That could make 
it hard for residents, marginalised or oth- 
erwise, to keep up. In his most moving 
chapter, Mr Bryant recounts the life of Voj- 
tech Berger, a carpenter and communist. 
His views were mistrusted between the 
wats; but after Czechoslovakia became a 
communist state in 1948, Berger seems to 
have been lost: “One wonders if, as a young 
man, this is what Berger had had in mind.” 

By the end of the book, readers might 
conclude that standing outside or against 
the mainstream—as a Czech nationalist or 
radical carpenter or Vietnamese immi- 
grant—is what lends characters like these 
their strength. An upbringing that spans 
two communities is many things, Ms 
Nguyen Jiraskova has noted, but never bor- 
ing. As Mr Bryant observes, cities the world 
over help people like his subjects find and 
make homes in their own image. @ 






The Economist May 29th 2021 


Censorship 


And be damned 





Dangerous Ideas. By Eric Berkowitz. 
Beacon Press; 320 pages; $29.95. The 
Westbourne Press; £20 


HIS LIVELY and wide-ranging history of 
T censorship opens with a wise remind- 
er. “The compulsion to silence others”, 
writes Eric Berkowitz, an American lawyer 
and author, “is as old as the urge to speak.” 
As a firm believer in free speech, Mr Berko- 
witz views censorship through the ages as 
mostly futile, perverse or wrong. Yet he 
grasps that neither side in this ancient 
contest is pure or simple. Nor, in his en- 
grossing account, do either free speech or 
its opponents ever win final victories. 

Mr Berkowitz focuses chiefly on the Un- 
ited States and Britain, with glances at oth- 
er European countries—such as 17th- and 
18th-century France, famous for libelles, 
scurrilous and usually sexual attacks on 
royalty, clergy and other notables. He brief- 
ly widens the field at the end for a discou- 
raging look at enemies of free speech in 
less liberal or less democratic places. 

Silencers of speech operate directly and 
indirectly. The most obvious direct kind is 
state censorship. It may forbid speech un- 
less cleared in advance (pre-censorship), 
punish it after the event (criminal libel) or 
burden publishers and media with undue 
regulations or taxes. Speech here includes 
not just voicing or disseminating words 
but proclaiming your faith as you wish, 
campaigning for your chosen causes and 
making art without interference. 

Pre-censorship has often proved self- 
defeating. With the coming of print, books 
as a rule needed licence before publica- 
tion. In Britain, where licensing was out- 
sourced to the printers’ guild, prior control 
proved ineffective and corrupt, and was 
abandoned by the end of the 17th century. 
The papal Index of Forbidden Books (1559- 
1966), backed by the law in many Catholic 
countries, gave publicity to works that 
would otherwise have remained obscure. 
The harder Soviet censors worked, the 
stronger grew underground papers, politi- 
cal jokes and public disbelief. 

Criminal libel, which replaced pre-cen- 
sorship in common-law countries, might 
be seditious, obscene or blasphemous. 
That threefold division tracked the silenc- 
ers’ chief preoccupations: political dis- 
sent, fascination with sex and disregard 
for religion. Prosecutions continued even 
late into the 20th century. Especially be- 
fore juries, they could backfire, as Mr Ber- >> 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


» kowitz recounts with relish. In 1817 Wil- 
liam Hone was charged in Britain with 
blasphemy for parodying church liturgy. 
In defence, Hone read out passages of his 
parodies that so reduced the courtroom to 
laughter that acquittal was assured. Ob- 
scenity trials have commonly stumbled on 
the prosecution’s dilemma as to whether to 
say the unsayable or primly allude to it. 

Entertaining as they are, court pratfalls 
were the exception. Mr Berkowitz stresses 
that suppression had the upper hand until 
recently. Free speech’s most eloquent 
modern champion, John Stuart Mill, pub- 
lished “On Liberty” in 1859; but in Europe 
and America state censorship weakened 
only in the 1950s-60s. Then and at other 
times, the law responded to public opin- 
ion. That is the second, indirect means by 
which speech may be silenced—or freed. 
Pressure may come from the majority view 
or (as now) from the sensitivities of ethno- 
religious minorities. 

In America, where the First Amend- 
ment bars the government from limiting 
Speech save on exceptional grounds, 
courts have tended to strike down 
post-1945 laws controlling “hate speech”. 
In Europe, by contrast, such laws are com- 
mon and accepted even by free-speech lib- 
erals. Thus American courts are often said 
to be more “absolutist” about free expres- 
sion. Mr Berkowitz corrects that half-truth, 
noting that American courts have upheld 
speech bans on pacifists in wartime and 
communists during the cold war. 

Another indirect control turns on op- 
portunities to speak. Even if all should be 
free to do so, must everyone be given a 
platform, a newspaper, an audience? To ap- 
proach the question differently, does the 
gatekeeping power of media and web 
giants distort public argument? 

Governments have stepped in at times 
to make the giants share their megaphones 
and refrained from interfering at others. 
Recently American regulators and courts 
have favoured the giants. Requirements for 
fairness in political broadcasting were 
dropped in the 1980s. A law of 1996 deemed 
web providers not to be publishers, hence 
protected from civil suits over material 
posted. The Supreme Court ruled in 2010 
that corporations enjoy free-speech pro- 
tection, making limits on political spend- 
ing, among other things, harder to enforce. 
Different social silencers, those now called 
no-platforming and “cancel culture’, make 
up in stridency what they lack in formal 
clout (though Mr Berkowitz thinks their 
significance is exaggerated). 

Without always diving deep or giving 
clear answers, “Dangerous Ideas” shows 
that conflicts between free speech and cen- 
sorship are rarely simple or settled for 
long. Above all, Mr Berkowitz grasps how 
quarrels over free speech are often, at bot- 
tom, fights for control of the argument. @ 





Persian music 


Stream of 
consciousness 


Niche streaming services help Iranian 
musicians find their audience 


HE WORK of Mim Rasouli, a musician 

based near Tehran, is rich in Persian 
and Western influences. In “Fastalgia’, one 
of his best-known tunes, Mr Rasouli mash- 
es up songs by Seyyed Javad Zabihi, a muez- 
zin from the time of the shah; Mohammad 
Reza Shajarian, one of Iran’s greatest cul- 
tural treasures; Archive, an alt-rock band 
based in London; and Arms and Sleepers, a 
trip-hop group from Boston. The result is a 
dreamy, nostalgic track meant to evoke a 
time when the Ramadan fast began with 
Zabihi's call to prayer and the iftar, or fast- 
breaking evening meal, was accompanied 
by Shajarian’s thundering voice. 

Zabihi was murdered two years after 
the revolution of 1979; before he died last 
year Shajarian boycotted state radio to 
show support for pro-democracy protes- 
ters. Listeners can still stream their music 
on Spotify and similar services. But “Fas- 
talgia” itself is not available. Nor is any- 
thing else by Mr Rasouli, or indeed any Ira- 
nian musicians living and working in Iran. 

The reason is simple. Sanctions prevent 
Western companies from engaging in 
commercial relationships with Iranian en- 
tities or individuals. Mr Rasouli (pictured) 
says he would love to be on Spotify (itself 
not formally available in Iran), but instead 
puts his music online for nothing. His 
songs can be found on his personal web- 
site, YouTube, SoundCloud, Telegram and 


Books & arts 


Navahang, a Persian-music streaming ser- 
vice. “I didn’t choose them,’ Mr Rasouli 
says of this last outlet. Rather, after Nava- 
hang began posting his music of its own 
accord, he sent it more. He receives no pay- 
ment in exchange. 

Based in Finland, Navahang was set up 
in 2015 by Siavash Danesh, a refugee, with 
an app built in India. With roughly 2m us- 
ers, itis a small outfit that focuses on the 
Iranian underground scene and female art- 
ists. The service is free; registration is not 
required. It carries advertising, but its size, 
and the fact that many listeners are in un- 
profitable Iran, mean revenues are modest. 

To survive, Navahang flips the tradi- 
tional business model of streaming. “Un- 
like other services like Spotify where you 
are getting subscriptions and paying art- 
ists,’ says Mr Danesh, “we get money from 
the artists themselves.” Since Iran is nota 
Signatory to assorted copyright treaties, 
platforms like Navahang can use some Ira- 
nian work without paying. Many musi- 
cians, including Mr Rasouli, are delighted 
with the exposure. Those in the diaspora 
who want Navahang to promote them, for 
example on the homepage, pay for the 
privilege. Navahang also produces music 
for some Persian artists based outside Iran. 
Mr Danesh reckons 90% of its income 
comes from these two sources. 

Navahang is a relatively new entrant on 
the Persian-music streaming scene. The 
biggest and best-known Service is Radio Ja- 
van, set up in Washington, DC in 2004. Its 
app has been downloaded more than 5m 
times on Google's Play Store, many more 
than Navahang’s. Running a service aimed 
at Iranians is expensive, confirms Hamed 
Hashemi, Radio Javan’s founder. Not only 
are most users in Iran, but the lack of copy- 
right protection cuts both ways. His com- 
pany has a production arm, too, but it is 
hard to pursue claims when its music is 
bootlegged in Iran. Radio Javan alighted on 
the same strategy as Navahang. “We are a 
promotional company,’ says Mr Hashemi. 
“We promote music.” 

Think of it as targeted advertising. Per- 
Sian musicians want to reach Persian- 
Speaking listeners to secure record deals 
and gig bookings, in Tehran or elsewhere. 
The likelihood of being discovered or mak- 
ing much money on a mainstream ser- 
vice—Spotify carries over 1m artists and 
pays a fraction of a cent per stream—is low. 
For musicians in Iran, itis impossible. Pay- 
ing for promotion on Navahang or Radio 
Javan is a way to reach the right audience. 

But the benefits go wider. Iranian artists 
have long engaged with overseas music, as 
Mr Rasouli’s shows. Free Persian stream- 
ing services let the curious in the rest of the 
world discover culture originating in Iran. 
“AS an artist, I like my work being seen and 
heard,” says Mr Rasouli. The rewards, he 
adds, are spiritual rather than material. 


79 





8 Economic & financial indicators 


Economic data 


Gross domestic product 
% change on year ago 




















latest quarter* 20217 
UnitedStates 04. QI 6.4 6.0 
China 18.3 QI 2.4 8.5 
Japan aeol) 5.1 iD 
Britain -6.1 Qi -59 oho 
Canada -3.2 Q4 9.6 5.4 
Euro area -18 qi -2.5 4. 
Austria 57 Q4 -5.6 3.4 
Belgium 10 Qa 24 3.9 
France om Q' es 5.4 
Germany pemeQi = -/.0 35 
Greece 411.1 JES 
Italy 14 qi -16 3.4 
Netherlands 28 Qi -18 2.9 
Spain 43 Qa) -2.1 5.6 
Czech Republic -4.8 Q4 -1.2 3.7 
Denmark -14 4 -59 3.0 
Norway 14 qa -25 gids 
Poland ee 4 3.6 41 
Russia -1.0 ai na Soy. 
Sweden -0.8 Qi 45 33 
Switzerland -1.6 Q4 1.3 2.6 
Turkey oe 04 na 3.9 
Australia m4 = 13.1 3.4 
Hong Kong mo! 23.5 49 
India 04 94 427 10.4 
Indonesia -0.7 Qi na 3.3 
Malaysia -0.5 QI na 44 
Pakistan ee 2021** na i 
Philippines 42 Q1 {72 6.6 
Singapore em) 13.1 48 
South Korea ieee O11 6.6 oy 
Taiwan OemQi 129 6.2 
Thailand 26 0729 
Argentina 43 94 19.4 oy 
Brazil feeeo4 8133 a 
Chile fmol 13.4 6.2 
Colombia memo 119 48 
Mexico -3.6 Qi 3.1 ow) 
Peru 38 a 83105 
Egypt 2.0 4 na 29 
Israel 12 Qi -6.5 40 
Saudi Arabia -4.1 2020 na 2.9 
SouthAfrica  -41 Q4 62 2.4 















































Consumer prices 


Unemployment 









































% change on yearago |rate 

latest 2021T | % 
A2 Apr 27 ~~ 6.1. Apr 
0.9 Apr 1.6 5.1 Apri 
-0.5 Apr 0.1 2.6 Mar 
1.5 Apr 1.5 48 Febtt 
3.4 Apr yy) 8.1 Apr 
1.6 Apr 1.4 8.1 Mar 
oe Apr 1.7 5.6 Mar 
ieee Apr 1.5 5.8 Mar 
1.2 Apr LS 7.9 Mar 
ee Apr 1.9 45 Mar 
-0.3° Apr nil 15.8 Dec 
eee Apr 0.7 10.1. Mar 
1.9 Apr 2.0 3.4 Apr 
Zee Apr 1.3 15.3 Mar 
Salem Apr jh 3.4 Mart 
1.5. Apr 0.7 4.5 Mar 
Seem Apr 1.6 4.6 Feb? 
4.3 Apr 3.2 6.3. Apr8 
5.5 Apr aye 52 Ape 
eee Apr 1.4 9.4 Apr8 
om Apr 0.3 ay Nar 
gies Apr 14.5 13.1 MarS 
len 1 2.1 5.5 Apr 
0.7 Apr 1.6 6.4 Apr# 
4.3 Apr a 8.0 Apr 
1.4 Apr 2.8 6.3. Q18 
4.7 Apr 2.4 4.7 Mar8 
11.1. Apr 9.0 5.8 2018 
4.5 Apr 40 ed Oule 
ee Apr 1.8 29 Ol 
2am Apr RS 4.0 Apr8 
lee Apr 1.6 3.7 Apr 
3.4 Apr jeg 1.5 DecS 
46.3 Aprt 46.8 11.0 Q4s 
6.8 Apr 6.7 14.4 FebS## 
Semen Apr 3.6 10.4. MarS## 
oe Apr Z0 14.2 Mars 
(ule Apr 45 44° Mar 
24 Apr 2.6 12.6 _ Apr 
4.1 Apr 5./ 7A Qs 
0.8 Apr 3 5.4 Apr 
eee Apr 2.4 74 Q4 
4.5 Apr ei 32.5 Q4s 


Current-account 


balance 





-2.9 
Za 
a0 

-4.2 

-2.0 
Sel 
3.4 

-0.8 

-1.8 
6.8 

-5.8 
3.0 

10.8 
ies 
2 
7A 
2.4 
20 
3.6 
4.1 
70 

-2.0 
1.9 
36 

-1.0 

-0.3 
46 

-1./ 

-1.0 

16.7 
43 

15.5 
45 
ile 
(GES) 

-0.2 

-3.3 
2.0 

-0.3 

-3.3 
3.4 
Ae: 

ri 








% of GDP, 2021T 








The Economist May 29th 2021 

















| Budget Interest rates 
balance 10-yr gov't bonds change on 
% of GDP, 2021T | latest,% year ago, bp 
“135 1.6 89.0 
-47 29 $8 69.0 
-9.4 nil -8.0 
-12.1 0.9 69.0 
-8.9 1.4 90.0 
-6.6 -0.2 23.0 
-7.1 nil 10.0 
75 0.1 3.0 
-9.0 0.2 27.0 
-3.6 -0,2 23.0 
-5.9 0.9 -81.0 
-10.5 0.9 -64.0 
-3.4 -0.2 JAG 
-8.9 0.5 -14.0 
-5.5 le 95.0 
-1,3 On 36.0 
-1.7 iS 96.0 
-6.9 1.9 440 
-1./ is 162 
-2.6 0.4 45.0 
-2.3 -0,2 29.0 
-2.8 WA 543 
-7.3 1.6 68.0 
-4.1 1.2 one’ 
-7.0 6.0 1.0 
-6.4 6.4 -79.0 
-6.0 cy) 250 
-6.9 Q7 tt 134 
-74 40 TIO 
-4.1 LS 79.0 
-47 is) 80.0 
-0.5 0.5 -40 
6.6 _ | #E 54.0, 
-6.0 na na 
-79 9.4 225 
-7.2 40 201 
-8.9 ie 199 
-2.8 6.7 58.0 
-5.6 5.0 121° 
-8.1 na na 
-8.8 (fe 41.0 
-3.2 na na 
-9,2 8.9) -17.0 


Currency units 


per $ 


% change 


May 26th on year ago 


6.39 
109 
0.71 
le 
0.82 
0.82 
0.82 
0.82 
0.82 
0.82 
0.82 
0.82 
0.82 
20.8 
6.09 
8.35 
3.68 
73:6 
8.31 
0.90 
8.45 
28 
7.16 
(228 
14,328 
414 
154 
48.1 
1.32 
ales 
278 


31.4 


945 
Droll 
134 
3,743 
19.9 
3.83 


157 
3.25 
3.75 
13.8 


11.7 
13 
14.1 
14.1 
11.0 
11.0 
11.0 
11.0 
11.0 
11,0 
11,0 
11,0 
11,0 
18.2 
11,5 
18.3 

9.5 
-4.0 
15.9 

18 

“20.5 
163 
“0.1 

4,0 

3.0 

5.6 

4.0 

5.0 

76 
10.5 

78 

: 

-278 

0.9 

8.9 
0.5 
12.0 

fare 

1.1 

8.0 

0.3 

_iet 





Source: Haver Analytics. *% change on previous quarter, annual rate. The Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast. SNot seasonally adjusted. ¥New series. **Year ending June. Latest 3 months. ##3-month moving 
average. §§5-year yield. TDollar-denominated bonds. 





Markets 
% change on: 
Index one Dec3ist 
In local currency May 26th week 2020 
United States S&P 500 4,196.0 2.0 11.7 
United States NAScomp 13,738.0 33 6.6 
China Shanghai Comp 3,593.4 73 35 
China Shenzhen Comp 2,380.6 pis jy) 
Japan Nikkei 225 28,642.2 2) 4.4 
Japan Topix 1,920.7 {fe 6.4 
Britain FTSE 100 7,026.9 1.1 8.8 
Canada S&P TSX 19,7455 i aes) 
Euro area EUROSTOXX50 = 4,031.7 2.4 Se 
France CAC 40 6,391.6 2.1 eed 
Germany DAX* 15,450.7 jas 12.6 
Italy FTSE/MIB 24,778.0 2 11.4 
Netherlands AEX TL JIS: le 
Spain IBEX 35 9,196.9 1.4 13.9 
Poland WIG 64,427.8 2.6 (ee 
Russia RTS, $ terms 1,590.6 24 14.6 
Switzerland SMI 11,348.7 Za 6.0 
Turkey BIST 1,427.1 -2.2 -3.4 
Australia All Ord. 12306 73 7.0 
Hong Kong Hang Seng 29,166.0 2.0 EA 
India BSE SOs Je) 6.8 
Indonesia IDX 5,815.8 1.0 -2.7 
Malaysia KLSE SES -0.2 -3.0 








% change on: 








index one Dec 31st 
May 26th week 2020 
Pakistan KSE 46,812.3 a5 7.0 
Singapore ST| 3,146.1 iJ.3: 10.6 
South Korea KOSPI 3,168.4 -0.1 10.3 
Taiwan TWI 16,643.7 Bu) 36 
Thailand SET 1,568.6 0.4 S| 
Argentina MERV 56,599.0 1.1 10.5 
Brazil BVSP 123,989.2 1.1 42 
Mexico |PC 49,103.5 -0.6 — 1140 
Egypt EGX 30 10,369.6 -40 -4.4 
Israel TA-125 1,273.9 DS; 13.1 
Saudi Arabia Tadawul 10,471.6 1.0 205 
South Africa JSE AS 66,108.3 0.4 ie 
World, dev'd MSC 2,969.5 2.0 10.4 
Emerging markets MSCI 13520 i) =6 
US corporate bonds, spread over Treasuries 
Dec 31st 
Basis points latest 2020 
Investment grade 119 Teal 
High-yield 365 429 


Sources: Refinitiv Datastream; Standard & Poor's Global Fixed Income 
Research. *Total return index. 


Commodities 
The Economist commodity-price index % change on 
2015=100 May 18th May 25th* month year 
Dollar Index 
All Items 194.5 181.7 -1.8 69.9 
Food (lSSH5 SHS -3.9 44.1 
Industrials 
All 245 O22) -0.6 88.7 
Non-food agriculturals 1679 171.8 -1.2 975 
Metals 268.9 241.7 -0.5 86.9 
Sterling Index 
All items 208.9 196.2 -3,3 48.6 
Euro Index 
All items 176.5 164.6 -3.1 52.4 
Gold 
$ per oz 1,868.1 1,892.0 6.3 10.7 
Brent 
$ per barrel 68.8 68.7 ow 89.3 


Sources: Bloomberg; CME Group; Cotlook; Refinitiv Datastream; 
Fastmarkets; FT; |CCO; ICO; ISO; Live Rice Index; LME; NZ Wool 
Services; Thompson Lloyd & Ewart; Urner Barry; WSJ. *Provisional. 


For more countries and additional data, visit 


Economist.com/indicators 





Graphic detail Politics and demography 


The Economist May 29th 2021 81 


> Educated voters have switched their political leanings from right to left. Rich ones remain conservative 


Difference in political parties vote share between top 10% of voters 


(most-educated or highest-earning) and bottom 90% 
Selected Western democracies, % points 


Right-of-centre 
parties 


In 1970 


® sustralia By income 
| ° 20 
Britain | Sweden 
| Noway@ © co. +-@ 
e* France _* 
US 10 
Canada 
More support from highest- 
@ Italy earning and most-educated voters Q 





More support from lower-earning Italy @ 
and less-educated voters 
eo Canada @ -10 
Come é  é @ Left-of-centre 
~ Britain ) arties 
Sweden@~ Norway ~~ é , p 20 
Australia d 
-20 -10 0 10 20 
By education 
- Sweden ue 
ermany Norway : 
In 2010 @__ Britain O pustratia My de Naa 
e Fe) parties 
— = i 10 
France @m.. oe ® S 
More support from highest- Canada _@'t?'v 
earning and less-educated voters | US 0 
US Italy eo 
© «6 Britains Canada —@ 
a , -10 
rance ™ 
\, Australia ™ 
Left-of-centre ® » ~ 
parties Ps Norway cenmaly More support from lower- 
Sweden earning and most-educated voters 
-20 -10 0 10 20 


Brahmins v 
merchants 


Educated voters’ leftward shift is 
surprisingly old and international 


OU COULD fill a small library with books 
Yon right-wing populism. Some authors 
argue that these movements emerged in 
reaction to relatively recent events, suchas 
the financial crisis of 2007-09 or the ad- 
vent of social media. Others look to longer- 
lasting regional trends, like European inte- 
gration or racial politics in America. 

Thomas Piketty, an economist, became 
famous for a book that analysed 200 years 
of data on wealth inequality in a wide 
range of countries. This month he pub- 
lished a paper, co-written by Amory Gethin 
and Clara Martinez-Toledano, which ap- 
plies asimilar approach to the relationship 
between demography and ideology. Its 
findings imply that the electoral victories 
of Donald Trump and the Brexit campaign 
in 2016 were not an abrupt departure from 
precedent, but rather the consequence ofa 


60-year-old international trend. 

In a paper in 2018 Mr Piketty noted that 
elites in Britain, France and America were 
split between intellectuals who backed 
left-of-centre parties—he dubbed them the 
“Brahmin left”—and businesspeople who 
preferred right-wing ones (the “merchant 
right”). His new work expands this study 
from three Western democracies to 21. It 
combines data on parties’ policy positions 
with surveys that show how vote choices 
varied between demographic groups. 

The paper finds that income and educa- 
tion began diverging as predictors of ideol- 
ogy long ago. In 1955 both the richest and 
the most educated voters tended to sup- 
port conservative parties. Conversely, both 
poorer and less-educated people mostly 
chose labour or social-democratic ones. 

Today, wealthy people still lean to the 
right. In contrast, the relationship between 
education and ideology began to reverse as 
early as the 1960s. Every year, the 10% of 
voters with the most years of schooling 
gravitated towards left-wing parties, while 
the remaining 90% slid the other way. By 
2000, this had gone on for so long that, asa 
group, the most educated voters became 
more left-wing than their less-educated 


Difference in left-of-centre parties’ vote share 
between top 10% and bottom 90% of voters 
Selected Western democracies, % points 


By education - 


4 Higher vote share among most- 
educated or highest-earning voters 





By income 


1955 65 is 85 95 2005 15 


Average vote share by political-party groupings 
Selected Western democracies, % 





100 
Conservative/Christian democratic 
75 
Communist.___ 50 
25 
Socialist/Social democratic 0 


1950 60 70 80 90 2000 10 


Source: “Brahmin Left versus Merchant Right”, by Amory Gethin, 
Clara Martinez-Toledano and Thomas Piketty (working paper, 2021) 


peers. The gap has only grown since then. 
This trend is strikingly consistent. It 
developed just as fast in the 20th century 
as in the 21st, and appears in almost every 
Western democracy studied. This includes 
both two-party systems and proportional 
ones, in which green parties now lure edu- 
cated voters, and nativist parties attract the 
less educated. Such breadth and regularity 
make the rise of right-wing populists like 
Mr Trump—and of left-of-centre techno- 
crats like Emmanuel Macron or Justin Tru- 
deau—look like a historical inevitability. 
Although the authors do not identify a 
cause for this trend, the simplest explana- 
tion is that it stems from growing educa- 
tional attainment. In 1950 less than 10% of 
eligible voters in America and Europe had 
graduated from college. Any party relying 
on this group for support would have had 
scant hope of winning elections. In con- 
trast, more than a third of Western adults 
today have degrees, which is enough to an- 
chor a victorious coalition. And once can- 
didates and parties began catering to edu- 
cated voters—who often put living in a lib- 
eral society above lowering their tax bills— 
rival politicians could start winning elec- 
tions by taking the opposite position. @ 





° Obituary Yuan Longping 





To feed the world 


Yuan Longping, developer of hybrid rice, died on 
May 22nd, aged 90 


E WAS WANDERING In a ricefield of dreams. The plants were 

tall as sorghum, taller than a man. Their panicles hung full as 
brooms, and each grain was as big as a peanut. After walking a 
while he lay down in the leaf-shade with a friend, quite hidden. A 
rest was a good idea, because the wonder-plants went on and on. 
In fact, they covered the world. 

Then Yuan Longping woke up, laughing. The rice plants he had 
tended for decades at Anjiang and then Changsha in Hunan prov- 
ince, sowing and nurturing them, visiting daily on his motorbike 
to inspect them, were not quite there yet. But they still deserved 
their name of super rice. The leaves were straighter and taller than 
ordinary, and the grains plumper. They had all the vigour of the 
wild strain that he and his team had found, after much searching, 
beside a railway line in Hainan in 1970 and had cross-bred, over 
careful years, with the domesticated variety. Sceptics told him he 
was wasting his time, since rice was a Self-pollinator. He believed 
that cross-breeding was universal and, besides, that it always 
made the offspring stronger. 

The figures spoke for themselves. With his new hybrid rice the 
annual yield was 20-30% higher. This meant that at least 60m 
more people could be fed every year. In Yunnan province more 
than 17,000 kilograms had been produced per hectare. China's rice 
crop had risen from 57m tonnes in 1950 to 195m in 2017; from food 
deficiency, to food security. Higher rice-yields allowed farmers to 
turn more land to other uses—fruit, vegetables, fishponds—so 
that people not only ate more, but ate well. And this message was 
for the world, as well as China. Once his rice grew well, he sent 
seeds to the International Rice Research Institute in the Philip- 
pines. Then he travelled widely, all across Asia and to Africa and 
America, as well as inviting foreign students to the Hunan Hybrid 
Rice Research Centre in Changsha to instruct them. A fifth of all 
rice grown globally now comes from hybrids that were his. 


The Economist May 29th 2021 


For this he won the Medal of the Republic, China’s highest, and 
the World Food Prize. An asteroid was named after him. There was 
talk of the Nobel, too. All that seemed just smoke to him. Though 
he was rich, from his shares ina seed company that used his name, 
he looked like a peasant, wiry as a twig, with his face leathered by 
sun and his big hands rough from “playing in the mud” all day. He 
was far happier in his short-sleeved work-shirts, out in his rice, or 
stripped off swimming in any wild river he could find, than ina 
tang suit in some conference hall. At social gatherings, he would 
offer round the first cigarettes and the nimblest jokes. When he 
lost at mahjong, no one was more delighted to pay the penalty of 
creeping through under the table. 

Why he had become an agronomist was tricky to explain. His 
mother, whom he adored, did not want him to do it. He was a city 
boy anyway, born in Beijing, though he enjoyed the countryside 
and the thought of growing luscious things, like the grapes Charlie 
Chaplin could pick at his kitchen door in “Modern Times”. As he 
made his way to the Anjiang agricultural school, in a charcoal-fu- 
elled bus struggling through the mountains, he had doubts him- 
self. What settled his vocation was famine. 

In 1949, at the founding of Communist China, he had first met 
hunger on the roads. Between 1959 and 1961, in Mao Zedong’s Great 
Leap Forward to collectivise farming, he saw country people fall- 
ing down dying in the fields. They had been driven to eating tree- 
bark, fern-roots, even white clay. At the college, too, there was so 
little to eat that he barely had energy to dig. He dreamed of bowls 
of steamed fat pork, but woke to chew on rice bran. From that 
point his mission was to make sure people were fed. 

Before the famine he had worked on grafting, because that was 
the Soviet model and Mao’s command. Crossbreeding of plants 
was forbidden and genes, ludicrously, were dismissed as “meta- 
physical”. So he grafted moonflowers on sweet potatoes, tomatoes 
on potatoes and a watermelon on a pumpkin (grotesque fruit, in- 
describable taste!), but found that any inherited traits vanished in 
the second generation. Secretly then he read Gregor Mendel on 
plant genetics, hiding him under the People’s Daily, and after 1960 
he turned his full attention to China’s staple, rice. 

He loved it in any case. As a boy he was enraptured by the deli- 
ciousness of xiaozhan rice from Tianjin, said to be the best in Chi- 
na. Around Anjiang, what the peasants wanted was quantity: mir- 
acle-yields from their fields. They would cross the mountains to 
get better seeds, so he did the same, traipsing round China to find 
the strong wild male-sterile plants he needed. Once he found 
them, in that unlikely spot in Hainan, it took three years to perfect 
the hybridising and another three to get his super rice into com- 
mercial production. Then, ina steep curve, yields soared away. 

The Communist Party applauded him, but he never joined. He 
worried that, not understanding politics, he might say the wrong 
thing. In the Mao years at Anjiang he left indoctrination to other 
teachers, while he taught sports and how to sing Russian songs. 
The only concession he made to the Cultural Revolution was to 
give up his precious, then “decadent”, violin. Party officials called 
him “Comrade”, but he was no comrade of theirs, only of his agro- 
nomist colleagues and, he hoped, all hungry people. For their sake 
he kept on working to make rice better: salt-tolerant to grow by the 
coast, cross-bred with maize to be more nutritious, enriched with 
Vitamin A to improve people's eyes. He fizzed with the thought 
that if just half of the 160m hectares of ricefields in the world were 
planted with his hybrid rice, an increase in yield of two tonnes per 
hectare would feed 500m more people every year. And he still 
talked, impishly, of plants taller than a man. 

Outside the funeral home in Changsha on the day after his 
death, crowds came to lay a mountain of yellow and white chry- 
santhemums. Several of the mourners said that whenever they sat 
down to a meal, or merely smelled the fragrance of rice, they 
would remember “Grandfather Yuan”. Among the flowers were the 
traditional bowls of boiled rice, super-food for his journey. @ 





Subscriber-only live digital event 


Can Brazil survive 
Jair Bolsonaro? 


DB alelaxer-\ a lelat-mlelae 
4pm BsT / 11am EDT / 8am PDT 


Join us for a conversation about Brazil. 

Our journalists will examine President Jair 
Bolsonaro's disastrous response to covid-19 and 
'dgl=u 9) x0) 0}-]0)(-mae-] (-1el Ke) AV (em =] 9-74] eK -1ee) alo)anva-lale 
politics. Subscribers will also have the chance 

to hear about Sarah's recent trip to indigenous 
territories in the Amazon and the challenges of 
illegal mining and rising deforestation. 


Sarah Maslin 
Sao Paulo bureau chief 





Helen Joyce 
Be =)pie-liam=elike)s 





Reserve your space: 
economist.com/BrazilEvent 

Skip to main content
Search

 UPLOAD
 SIGN UP | LOG IN
 
 
 
 
 
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE  CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
Full text of "The Economist Magazine, 11 June 2021"
See other formats
How to become the next Tesla 


The Commercial property after covid 
ee sro =Je-7 4] el i gar-] me (=(er-[e(-pr- ol -relf-] Ba) ole) at 
ECONOMISt Hae, 





@ifer-le eel akysrea(ellel=cw-lalemelnliielaca 


JUNE 5TH-11TH 2021 


The new geopolitics 
rey i big business 





al 








DOWNLOAD 


CSS Notes, Books, MCQs, Magazines 


Yes We Can Do It! 


yW. THECSSPOINT.COM 


e Download CSS Notes 

e Download CSS Books 

e Download CSS Magazines 
e Download CSS MCQs 

e Download CSS Past Papers 


The CSS Point, Pakistan's The Best 
Online FREE Web source for All CSS 
Aspirants. 


Email: info@thecsspoint.com 





=m CSS SOLVED PAPERS GUIDE 2017 
CSS SOLVED PAPERS GUIDE 20175 


(ORAM. | 
EIN GIEISH oo.» Os) fey 


eT) CSS ENGLISH Precis 8 Cts 
fo Compulsory mcCQs 2003-16 z 
css Compulsory MCQs 2003-16 


Que rane! Fo the Potn’ Islamic Studies i. 
—™ CURRENT AFFAIRS 2 


= : ANCE ss 
wTrtiPonary ArFrAIR 





BUY CSS / PMS / NTS & GENERAL KNOWLEDGE BOOKS 


ONLINE CASH ON DELIVERY ALL OVER PAKISTAN 


Visit Now: 


WWW.CSSBOOKS.NET 





For Oder & Inquiry 
Call/SMS/WhatsApp 


— 0726 540141 


0333 6042057 


SUKKUR IBA TESTING SERVICE (STS) 


PST | JEST GUIDE BY CARAVAN 
2021 EDITION 





wan THE MOST AUTHENTIC 


SUKKUR IBA TESTING SERVICE (STS) 










Based on the Sindh Textbook Board Syllabus 
as, Announced by the School Education and 
Literacy Department (Govt. of Sindh) 


® Part4 (Mother Tongue (Sindhi/Urdu) 15 Questions 
® Part-l (S. Studies, C.A,G.K / Islamiyat/ 15 Questions 
C. Knowledge) 


® Part4ll (English) 20 Cnetions 


* Part-4V (Mathematics) 25 Questions 
25 Questions 


a Ae ae one 





Compiled by 
Ch. Ahmad Najib 


° ~ 
- =e i -——_s * 
a -3* -< 
. . ee 
~? 
2 
= 
Se et wee a= se E.# 
= = “eS a re" 
“s+ 





CALL/SMS 0726540141 - 03336042057 


INTERNATIONAL LAW 
SK KAPOOR & LN TANDON 





INTERNATIONAL 





CANE TAN DON 
SW EATPOOR 


CALL/SMS 0726540141 - 088386042057 





_-@B00Ks BAZAR 


ONLINE BOOKS STORE 





Feit 


The Economist June 5th 2021 





On the cover 


America and China now 
dominate global business. 
That is a wake-up call for other 
countries: leader, page 11. Once 
a corporate heavyweight, 
Europe is now an also-ran: 
briefing, page 20. Will poor 
countries benefit from 
international tax reforms? 
Page 64 


How to become the next Tesla 
A traffic jam of startups Is vying 
to follow in Elon Musk’s tyre 
tracks, page 53 


Commercial property after 
covid-19 As remote working 
outlasts the pandemic, someone 
has to foot the bill for empty 
offices: leader, page 72, and 
analysis, page 60 


Brazil's dismal decade Few 
countries have fallen so fast. To 
recover, it must recognise what 
went wrong: leader, page 14. 
Politicians, businesses and 
voters must act before it is too 
late. See our special report, 
after page 40 


Cicadas, insecticides and 
children The return of periodical 
cicadas bodes ill for children’s 
well-being, page 69 


> Activating the digital 
element of your subscription 
means that you can search our 
archive, read all of our daily 
journalism and listen to audio 
versions of our stories. Just 
visit economist.com/activate 








1 


ooh 


12 


12 


13 


14 


18 


20 


The world this week 


A summary of political 
and business news 


Leaders 


The world economy 
Geopolitics and business 
Israel 

A chance of renewal 
Commercial property 
House of pain 

America’s crime spike 
Killing reform 


Latin America’s giant 
Brazil’s dire decade 


Letters 


On Mexico, covid-19 
vaccines, green investing, 
endowments, Charles 
Dickens 


Briefing 
Europe’s big firms 


The land that ambition 
forgot 


Special report: 
Brazil 


A troubled country 
After page 40 


Schumpeter Long ago 
Roche bet on personalised 
health care. Now its time 
has come, page 59 





United States 
23 Liberals and crime 
24 Sins of commission 
25 Funding research 
26 Living ina van 
26 Horseracing and drugs 
27 Covid-19 and race 
27 The hunger wanes 


28 Lexington Minor league 
baseball 


The Americas 
29 Venezuela and sanctions 
30 Argentine separatists 


Asia 
31 South Korea's and 
China’s kimchi wars 
32 India’s far-flung territories 
33 Internet wars in India... 
33 ...and in Indonesia 
34 Banyan Japan’s Olympic 
stubbornness 


China 
35 The three-child policy 
36 Tibet’s new rail line 


37 Chaguan The party and 
the very young 


Britain 
38 The resilient state 
39 Turf wars 
40 Bagehot Parallel societies 








»» Contents continues overleaf 


6 BM@elcaas 


Middle East & Africa 
41 South African graft 
42 France's reset in Africa 
43 Congo's erupting volcano 
44 Is Netanyahu out? 
45 Musical trucks in Jordan 








Europe 
46 Covid-19 in Europe 
47 Saxony-Anhalt votes 
48 One roof, three faiths 
48 A mafioso goes free 


49 An interview with 
Ukraine’s president 


50 Charlemagne Small 
states under fire 


International 


51 Free speech and 
trans rights 


Business 
53 Tesla wannabes 
56 LEGO’s diversity set 
56 Anime blockbusters 


57 Bartleby Not-so-bullshit 
jobs 

58 The military-industrial 
complex in China 


59 Schumpeter Roche sees 
the future 


Volume 439 Number 9248 


Published since September 1843 

to take part in ‘a severe contest between 
intelligence, which presses forward, 

and an unworthy, timid ignorance 
obstructing our progress.” 


Editorial offices in London and also: 
Amsterdam, Beijing, Berlin, Brussels, Chicago, 
Dakar, Dallas, Dubai, Johannesburg, Madrid, 
Mexico City, Moscow, Mumbai, New Delhi, New 
York, Paris, San Francisco, Sao Paulo, Seoul, 
Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo, Washington DC 





Subscription service 

For our full range of subscription offers, including 
digital only or print and digital bundled, visit: 
Economist.com/offers 


If you are experiencing problems when trying to 
subscribe, please visit our Help pages at: 
www.economist.com/help for troubleshooting 
advice. 


Finance & economics 
60 Post-pandemic offices 
61 Oil demand recovers 
62 Housing in Hong Kong 
63 Private equity in China 
63 Covid-19’s unequal effects 
64 Twilight of the tax haven 
65 Poor countries and tax 


66 Free exchange Limits on 
public debt 


Science & technology 
67 Imitating DARPA 
68 Composing by computer 
69 Insecticides and children 
70 Unreliable alibis 


70 The origin of watermelons 


Books & arts 
71 History of Dutch slavery 
72 Decision-making 


73 Johnson Gender-neutral 
language 
74 The us postal service 


The Economist June 5th 2021 















Economic & financial indicators 


76 Statistics on 42 economies 


Graphic detail 


77 The bias in facial-recognition programs 


Obituary 


78 Josep Almudéver, the last brigadista 


The best way to contact our Customer Service 
team is via phone or live chat. You can contact us 
on the below numbers; please check our website 
for up to date opening hours. 


North America: 
Latin America & Mexico: 


+1800 456 6086 
+1 636 449 5702 


Please 
( ¥recycle 


uy 
PEFC 


PEFC/29-31-58 


PEFC certified 

This copy of The Economist 
is printed on paper sourced 
from sustainably managed 
forests certified to PEFC 
www.pefc.org 


© 2021 The Economist Newspaper Limited. All rights reserved. Neither this publication nor any part of it may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of The Economist Newspaper Limited. The Economist (ISSN 0013-0613) is published every week, except for a year-end double issue, by The Economist Newspaper Limited, 750 3rd 
Avenue, 5th Floor, New York, N Y 10017. The Economist is a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited. Periodicals postage paid at New York, NY and additional mailing offices. Postmaster: Send address changes to The 
Economist, P.O. Box 46978, St. Louis , MO. 63146-6978, USA. Canada Post publications mail (Canadian distribution) sales agreement no. 40012331. Return undeliverable Canadian addresses to The Economist, PO Box 7258 STN A, Toronto, 
ON M5W 1X9. GST R123236267. Printed by Quad/Graphics, Saratoga Springs, NY 12866 


Paid Advertisement 





Technology has changed a lot 
in 25 years. 


Shouldn’t internet regulations 
change too? 


2021 marks the 25th anniversary of the Telecommunications Act 
of 1996, the last comprehensive update to internet regulations. 


We support updated internet regulations on today’s key 
issues, including: 

- Protecting people's privacy 

- Enabling safe and easy data portability between platforms 
* Preventing election interference 


* Reforming Section 230 


See our progress on key issues and FACEBOOK 
next steps at about.fb.com/regulations Od CO = | 


Paid for by Facebook - about.fb.com 





The world this week Politics 









a, 





The opponents of Binyamin 
Netanyahu reached an agree- 
ment that would end his 12- 
year stretch as prime minister 
of Israel. Under the deal, 
Naftali Bennett, the leader ofa 
nationalist party, would be- 
come prime minister, serving 
for two years before handing 
over to Yair Lapid, a centrist 
and secularist. The Knesset 
still must pass a vote of confi- 
dence in the new coalition, 
which includes an Arab-Israeli 
party. That leaves time for Mr 
Netanyahu to try to pick off its 
right-wing supporters. 


The African Union suspended 
Mali’s membership and 
threatened to impose sanc- 
tions if a civilian-led govern- 
ment is not restored. Last 
month Mali’s armed forces 
mounted a coup, the second in 
less than a year. 


The Democratic Republic of 
Congo Said that 32 of its MPS 
had died of covid-19. The re- 
ported total for the entire 
country of 80m is only 786 
deaths. So either MPs are very 
unlucky or there is massive 
undercounting among less 
prominent folk, and a far 
worse pandemic than official 
numbers admit. 


Iran’s largest navy vessel (in 
terms of tonnage) sank after 
catching fire in the Gulf of 
Oman during a training mis- 
sion. The cause of the fire was 
not immediately clear. The 
Navy Said it started in one of 
the ship’s systems. 


A cargo ship carrying chem- 
icals and plastic pellets sank 
off the coast of Sri Lanka, near 
Colombo. The X-Press Pearl had 
been on fire for two weeks. Its 
sinking will exacerbate an 
unfolding maritime disaster: 


hundreds of tonnes of fuel 
could escape from its tanks to 
add to the tonnes of plastic 
already finding their way onto 
local beaches. 


China’s ruling Politburo said 
the country’s two-children- 
per-couple rule would be 
changed to a three-child one. 
The government, which once 
tried to force people to have 
fewer babies, now wants them 
to have more, to stop the pop- 
ulation from ageing so fast. 
Parents who wanta third child 
rejoiced, but the vast majority 
do not. Demographers predict- 
ed that the birth rate would not 
rise much. 


Hishammuddin Hussein, 
Malaysia’s foreign minister, 
said his country would sum- 
mon China’s ambassador, after 
16 Chinese air-force planes 
were seen approaching Malay- 
Sla’S airspace over the South 
China Sea, where the coun- 
tries’ territorial claims overlap. 
The foreign ministry described 
the incident as a “serious 
threat to national sovereignty’. 
Chinese officials described the 
flights as “routine”. 


A Chinese blogger, Qiu 
Ziming, was sentenced to eight 
months in prison for “picking 
quarrels and causing trouble”. 
His offence related to his posts 
suggesting that China had 
under-reported the number of 
its soldiers killed in border 
clashes with India last year. 


Democrats staged a walk-out 
in the Texas legislature, pre- 
venting Republicans from 
passing a bill that would tight- 
en the state’s voting laws. 
Critics say the bill, which 
among other things bans 
24-hour polling stations, is 
intended to suppress black and 
Hispanic votes. Republicans 
will probably get another go at 
passing it ina special session 
of the legislature. 


America’s Department of the 
Interior suspended licences to 
drill for oil in the Arctic 
National Wildlife Refuge in 
Alaska, which for decades has 
been a flashpoint between 


| environmentalists and energy 








firms. The licences were sold 
during the final days of Donald 
Trump’s administration. 


Protests in Colombia contin- 
ued fora second month. Ivan 
Duque, the besieged president, 
sent the army to Cali, the city 
worst affected by the violence. 
Human Rights Watch said that 
at least 63 people have been 
killed during the past month. 


Tens of thousands of Brazil- 
lans took to the streets to voice 
their disapproval of Jair Bolso- 
naro’s handling of the covid-19 
crisis. Some waved signs de- 
manding “Bolsonaro out”. It 
was the first big protest against 
the president since the start of 
the pandemic. Mr Bolsonaro’s 
approval ratings have plum- 
meted; he is up for re-election 
next year. 


Mr Bolsonaro agreed that 
covid-embattled Brazil could 
step in at the last minute and 
host the Copa América foot- 
ball tournament, which starts 
on June 13th. Surging infec- 
tions in Argentina and protests 
in Colombia have caused both 
countries to withdraw as 
co-hosts. Critics fretted that 
cheering fans will turn the 
matches into superspreading 
events. 


Russia’s upper house of parlia- 
ment approved a law barring 
members of “terrorist” and 
“extremist” organisations from 
holding elective office. Vladi- 
mir Putin’s government rou- 
tinely applies those labels to 
peaceful dissident groups, 
such as the supporters of 
Alexei Navalny, the main 
opposition leader, who is in 
prison on bogus charges. 


America’s State Department 
imposed sanctions on one 
current and four former offi- 
cials in Bulgaria, because of 
their involvement in “signif- 
icant corruption”. 


Boris Johnson married his 
flancée, Carrie Symonds, at 
Westminster Cathedral. The 
twice-divorced Mr Johnson is 
the first British prime minister 
in 200 years to tie the knot 


| while in office. 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Coronavirus briefs 
To 6am GMT Jun 3rd 2021 


Weekly confirmed cases by area, m 


India 







Western Europe 


2020 2021 


Vaccination doses 
% of adults with 
Total’000 1stdose 2nd 
UAE 12,968 99 62 
Israel 10,586 98 92 
Bhutan 483 95 O 
Mongolia 3,183 91 65 
Malta 520 89 56 
Maldives 476 76 «41 
Britain 65,212 76 49 
Chile 18,682 75.56 
Canada 24,169 74 ~=#7 
Bahrain 1,756 74° «+61 


Sources: Johns Hopkins University CSSE; 
Our World in Data; United Nations 


Peru raised its death toll from 
the disease to 180,000 (from 
69,300) to Keep the figure in 
line with international count- 
ing of excess deaths. 


Britain reported zero daily 
deaths from covid-19 for the 
first time since the start of the 
pandemic in March last year. 
The country’s vaccine roll-out 
has been a stellar success. 
More than 75% of adults have 
received at least one jab. 


The World Health Organisa- 
tion (WHO) approved the 
Sinovac vaccine for emergen- 
cy use, the second jab made in 
China to receive its blessing. 


The wHO reclassified variants 
of the disease by letters of the 
Greek alphabet to avoid upset- 
ting the countries where they 
were first spotted. The British 
variant becomes Alpha, the 
South African variant Beta, 
and so on. Inasomewhat less 
sensitive move, the WHO 
elected Syria, a blood- 
drenched dictatorship, toa 
seat on its executive board. 


> For our latest coverage of the 
virus please visit economist.com/ 
coronavirus or download the 
Economist app. 





The world this week Business 


In its latest outlook the OECD 
forecast that the world econ- 
omy will grow by 5.8% this 
year, a Sharp upward revision 
from its previous estimate. The 
success of vaccine roll-outs in 
much of the rich world and the 
huge stimulus programme in 
the United States have helped 
improve global prospects. GDP 
per person has already 
returned to pre-pandemic 
levels in some countries, such 
as America and South Korea, 
but the OEcD thinks that it will 
take another year for much of 
Europe to make up the differ- 
ence, and another two to five 
years in Argentina, Mexico and 
South Africa. Real global out- 
put will still be $3trn less by 
the end of 2022 than it would 
have been without the crisis. 


Brazil’s official statistics office 
said that the country’s econ- 
omy returned to pre-pandemic 
size in the first quarter, when 
GDP grew by 1.2% over the 
previous quarter, a faster pace 
than many economists were 
expecting. India’s economy 
was also on the road to recov- 
ery in the first quarter, boosted 
by manufacturing and govern- 
ment spending, but that was 
before an escalation of co- 
vid-19 infections that plagued 
the country in April and May. 


A study by the International 
Labour Organisation found 
that a further108m workers 
and their families around the 
world are living on $3.20 or 
less a day relative to 2019, in 
purchasing power parity 
terms, returning working- 
poverty rates to those of 2015. 
The recovery will create a net 
100m jobs this year, though 
total employment will still fall 
short of its pre-crisis level. 


The euro zone’s annual rate of 
inflation leapt to 2% in May, 
passing the European Central 
Bank’s target of “below, but 
close to 2%”, for the first time 
in more than two years. In 
Germany it hit 2.4% (up from 
1.6% at the start of the year). 
The EcB, along with the Federal 
Reserve, insists that surging 
prices are temporary and will 
eventually ease. Rising energy 
costs are a big factor driving 


inflationary pressures. Petrol 
(gas) prices reached a seven- 
year high in America ahead of 
the Memorial Day holiday. 


There is little sign of those 
prices easing in the near 
future. This week Brent crude 
closed at over $70 a barrel for 
the first time in two years, 
after OPEC+ (which includes 
Russia) signalled that the 
demand for oil will increase 
later this year. The glut of oil 
that kept prices low before the 
pandemic has diminished 
enough to encourage OPEC to 
raise output. 


Declining cases of covid-19 and 
the easing of restrictions made 
Americans more willing to 
travel over the Memorial Day 
weekend. Over1.9m people 
were screened at America’s 
airports on both Friday and 
Monday, the busiest days. That 
was well up from more than 
300,000 on each day last year, 
but down from 2.5m in 2019. 


A cyber-attack on JBS, the 
world’s biggest meat-proces- 
sor, halted its operations in 
America and Australia. It is the 
third big cyber-attack in recent 
weeks, following those ona 
pipeline in America and Ire- 
land’s health-care system. 
Russian criminal gangs are 
thought to be behind all three. 





eee 


— 











A long journey ahead 
coer 
London Underground 
Average daily journeys, m 


Ny WO Ee MN 


— 


| | il WO 
2018 19 20 21 


Source: Transport for London 





Transport for London, the 
city’s public-transport 
authority, received its third 
emergency support package 
from the government since the 
Start of the pandemic. The 
main reason for TfL’s woes is 
its shift away from subsidies in 
recent years towards a reliance 
on passenger income. That 
revenue was worth around 
£5bn ($7bn) before covid-19, 
but has since dwindled. The 
government's funding condi- 
tions will lead to fare increas- 
es. But there is some light at 
the end of tunnel: passengers 
are returning, albeit hesitantly. 


Britain began the long process 
of joining the Comprehensive 
and Progressive Agreement for 
Trans-Pacific Partnership, after 
the 1: countries that comprise 
the free-trade area agreed on 
its application. Japan in partic- 
ular has thrown its support 


The Economist June 5th 2021 9 


behind Britain’s request in 
order to give the pact more 
heft; America withdrew froma 
precursor agreement during 
the Trump administration. 


A former banker with M.M. 
Warburg, one of Germany's 
oldest private banks, was 
found guilty of aggravated tax 
evasion for his participation in 
the “cum-ex” scandal, where 
share transactions were 
conducted at high speed on or 
just before the day dividend 
payments were recorded, 
allowing the participants to 
claim duplicate tax rebates. 
The unnamed banker is in his 
70S. His conviction will prob- 
ably be the first of many; there 
are another 1,000 suspects. 


Turkey’s president, Recep 
Tayyip Erdogan, again put the 
independence of the country’s 
central bank in doubt witha 
renewed call for a cut in in- 
terest rates in July or August. 


Tallying the books 

Lockdowns boosted sales and 
profit at Bloomsbury for the 
year ending February 28th. 
“The popularity of reading has 
been a ray of sunshine in an 
otherwise very dark year,’ said 
the publisher's chief executive, 
as the company again raised 
profit expectations for 2021. 


#ModernMBA 


yg Ay 


i = 
x a 
. a 


‘iy ‘ =. ' aver 
be ioe ares 
i} f “We ‘ ‘ | Be hy . 


\ 


It’s Time for the Business School of the Future 
Network driven. Mobile first. Innovative tuition model. 

Educating the next generation of business leaders. | 
Do you have what it takes? | 


Apply now at quantic.edu Q UA \ ‘ : C 


Selective Admission / Accredited / MBA and Executive MBA 








ite 


Economist 





Geopolitics and business 


America and China now dominate global business. That is a wake-up call for other countries 


WENTY YEARS ago this week the share price of a startup run 

by an obsessive called Jeff Bezos had slumped by 71% over 12 
months. Amazon’s near-death experience was part of the dot- 
com crash that exposed Silicon Valley’s hubris and, along with 
the $14bn fraud at Enron, shattered confidence in American 
business. China, meanwhile, was struggling to privatise its 
creaking state-owned firms, and there was little sign that it 
could create a culture of entrepreneurship. Instead the bright 
hope was in Europe, where a new single currency promised to 
catalyse a giant business-friendly integrated market. 

Creative destruction often makes predictions look silly, but 
even by these standards the post-pandemic business world is 
dramatically different from what you might have expected two 
decades ago. Tech firms comprise a quarter of the global stock- 
market and the geographic mix has become strikingly lopsided 
(see Briefing). America and, increasingly, China are ascendant, 
accounting for 76 of the world’s 100 most valuable firms. Eu- 
rope’s tally has fallen from 411n 2000 to 15 today. 

This imbalance in large part reflects American and Chinese 
Skill, and complacency in Europe and elsewhere. It raises two 
giant questions: why has it come about? And can it last? 

In themselves, big companies are no better than small ones. 
Japan Inc’s status soared in the 1980s only to collapse. Big firms 
can be a sign of success but also of sloth. Saudi 
Atamco, the world’s second-most-valuable 
firm, is notso mucha $2trn symbol of vigour as 
of a desert kingdom’s dangerous dependency 
on fossil fuels. Even so, the right sort of giant 
company is a sign of a healthy business ecology 
in which big, efficient firms are created and 
constantly swept away by competition. It is the 
secret to raising long-run living standards. 

One way of capturing the dominance of America and China is 
to compare their share of world output with their share of busi- 
ness activity (defined as the average of their share of global 
stockmarket capitalisation, public-offering proceeds, venture- 
capital funding, “unicorns’—or larger private startups, and the 
world’s biggest 100 firms). By this yardstick America accounts 
for 24% of global GppP, but 48% of business activity. China ac- 
counts for 18% of GDP, and 20% of business. Other countries, 
with 77% of the world’s people, punch well below their weight. 

Part of the explanation is Europe’s squandered opportunity. 
Political meddling and the debt crisis in 2010-12 have stalled the 
continent’s economic integration. Firms there largely failed to 
anticipate the shift towards the intangible economy. Europe has 
no startups to rival Amazon or Google. But other countries have 
struggled, too. A decade ago Brazil, Mexico and India were 
poised to create a large cohort of global firms. Few have emerged. 

Instead, only America and China have been able to marshal 
the process of creative destruction. Of the 19 firms created in the 
past 25 years that are now worth over $100bn, nine are in Amer- 
ica and eight in China. Europe has none. Even as mature tech 
giants like Apple and Alibaba try to entrench their dominance, a 
new Set of tech firms including Snap, PayPal, Meituan and Pin- 
duoduo are reaching critical mass. The pandemic has seen a 





burst of energy in America and China and a boom in fundraising. 
Firms from the two countries dominate the frontier of new tech- 
nologies such as fintech and electric cars (See Business section). 

The magic formula has many ingredients. A vast home mar- 
ket helps firms achieve scale quickly. Deep capital markets, net- 
works of venture capitalists and top universities keep the start- 
up pipeline full. There is a culture that exalts entrepreneurs. 
China's tycoons boast of their “996” work ethic: 9am to 9pm, six 
days a week. Elon Musk sleeps on Tesla’s factory floor. Above all 
politics supports creative destruction. America has long tolerat- 
ed more disruption than cosy Europe. After 2000, China’s rulers 
let entrepreneurs run riot and laid off 8m workers at state firms. 

The recent erosion of this political consensus in both coun- 
tries is one reason this dominance could prove unsustainable. 
Americans are wotried about national decline, as well as low 
wages and monopolies (roughly a quarter of the S&P 500 index 
merits antitrust scrutiny, we estimated in 2018). The Economist 
supports the Biden administration’s aim to promote competi- 
tion and expand the social safety-net to protect workers hurt by 
disruption. But the danger is that America continues to drift to- 
wards protectionism, industrial policy and, on the left, punitive 
taxes on capital, that dampen its business vim. 

In China President Xi Jinping sees big private firms as a threat 
to the Communist Party’s power and social sta- 
bility. The cowing of tycoons began last year 
with Jack Ma, the co-founder of Alibaba, and 
has since spread to the bosses of three other big 
tech firms. As party officials seek to “guide” in- 
cumbent private firms in order to achieve poli- 
cy goals, such as national self-sufficiency in 
some technologies, they are also more likely to 
protect them from freewheeling competitors. 

The more America and China intervene, the more the rest of 
the world should worry about the lopsided geography of global 
business. In theory the nationality of profit-seeking firms does 
not matter: as long as they sell competitive products and create 
jobs, who cares? But if firms are swayed by governments at 
home, the calculus changes. 

As globalisation unwinds, rows are already erupting over 
where multinational firms produce vaccines, set digital rules 
and pay taxes (See Finance section). European hopes of being a 
regulatory superpower may become a figleaf for protectionism. 
Others with less clout may erect barriers. To assert its sovereign- 
ty, India has banned Chinese social media and hobbled Amer- 
ican e-commerce firms. That is the worst of both worlds, depriv- 
ing local consumers of global innovations and creating barriers 
that make it even harder for local firms to achieve scale. 


It’s the acorns, not the oaks 

It would be a tragedy if only two countries in the world proved 
capable of sustaining a process of creative destruction at scale. 
But it would be even worse if they turned away from it, and other 
places admitted defeat and put up barricades. The best gauge of 
success will be if in 20 years’ time the list of the world’s biggest 
companies looks absolutely nothing like today’s. m 


Leaders 11 


12 


Leaders 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Israel 


A chance of renewal 


Getting rid of Binyamin Netanyahu Is a good way to help Israel clean up its politics 


EVER BEFORE has Binyamin Netanyahu’s hold on the premi- 
N ership of Israel looked so weak. On June 2nd his opponents, 
led by Naftali Bennett (pictured) and Yair Lapid, agreed to forma 
government that excludes the man who has dominated his 
country’s politics for the past 12 years (see Middle East & Africa 
section). The only thing left is for the Knesset (Israel’s parlia- 
ment) to hold a confidence vote. Mr Netanyahu will do his ut- 
most to sabotage it. But if he fails, his long reign will be over. 

“King Bibi” has overseen a flourishing high-tech economy 
and one of the world’s best covid-19 vaccination campaigns. He 
has made peace with several Arab states and kept Israel safe, not- 
withstanding a recent war in Gaza. Many of his 
policies are now generally accepted, even by the 
politicians pushing him out. 

Yet he also sowed division, mixing national- 
ism, chauvinism and resentment of elites in or- 
der to win elections. He clung to power even 
after being charged with corruption. And when 
threatened he has lashed out at anyone in his 
way. The press, the judiciary, the police—all 
were part ofa “witch hunt” aimed at bringing him down, he said. 

If Mr Netanyahu stays, it will drag a weary electorate to the 
polls fora fifth time since 2019. If he goes, it may help heal Israeli 
politics. True, his Likud party is still the largest in the Knesset, 
and his nationalist and religious base remains an electoral force. 
But he has been a uniquely talented demagogue, eloquent and 
ruthless in equal measure. Though he will remain on the scene 
(and surely plot his revenge), his removal from the top job makes 
the political mood in Israel a little less toxic. Moreover, his pro- 
secution and political comeuppance are proof that Israel’s insti- 
tutions have held firm in the face of his assault. 





Mr Netanyahu, though, has shown up Israel’s vulnerabilities. 
The next government must fix them. That will not be easy, as the 
parties in the coalition do not agree on much. Wisely, Mr Ben- 
nett, who would become prime minister, has set expectations 
low. “We will focus on what can be done, instead of arguing over 
what is impossible,” he says. A budget is a priority, since Israel 
has not had one in two years. But the new team should also focus 
on governance—and start by closing the loophole that lets a per- 
son under indictment serve as prime minister. 

Other steps might include depoliticising the police, whose 
aggressive tactics helped spark riots inside Israel that culminat- 
ed in Palestinians firing rockets into Israel from 
Gaza. Splitting the job of attorney-general, so 
that one person is not both chief prosecutor and 
legal counsel to the government, is another 
good idea. At some point a conversation should 
be had about the Supreme Court, which has 
great power and little accountability. 

Reforms will be difficult. But tackling any of 
these problems would have been impossible 
under Mr Netanyahu, who used the legal system as a bogeyman. 
His reliance on the ultra-Orthodox also meant that civil mar- 
riage remains illegal and public services closed on the Sabbath, 
although most Israelis favour liberalising such things. 

The new coalition includes an Arab party, but little progress 
is likely with the Palestinians. Still, small steps are possible, 
such as increasing funding in Arab parts of Israel and alleviating 
the suffering in the occupied territories and in Gaza. “Everyone 
will have to postpone the realisation of some of their dreams,” 
says Mr Bennett, an ardent supporter of the settler movement. A 
government grounded in reality? That doesn’t sound so bad. m@ 


Commercial property 


House of pain 


As remote working outlasts covid-19, someone has to foot the bill for empty offices 


N RECENT WEEKS diversity at work has taken on a new mean- 
Line. As vaccination progresses in the rich world and restric- 
tions ease, some huge office tenants, such as Goldman Sachs, a 
bank, want staff back full-time, while others, like Citigroup, a ri- 
val, expect some employees never to set foot in a central busi- 
ness district again. Behind the posturing, a consensus is slowly 
emerging that white-collar desk-warriors should be allowed to 
Stay at home more often post covid-19—and that many probably 
will. Office landlords, however, and those who bankroll them, 
continue to pretend that no storm is coming. With billions of 
dollars sunk in undesirable buildings, they face a reckoning. 

Office bulls rest their case on two pillars (see Finance sec- 
tion). One is to argue that recent evidence shows pandemic-in- 
duced disruptions are superficial and temporary. Offices have 
been spared the carnage that lockdowns have inflicted on other 


kinds of commercial property, such as restaurants and shops. 
Even as rent collections plummeted elsewhere, most corporate 
tenants have continued to pay on time. Debt delinquencies re- 
main a rarity, and prices paid for floor space in global cities have 
held up. No matter that most open spaces remain eerily silent. 
Developers report rises in viewings and lettings, and investors 
have already pledged billions of dollars to new projects. 

The other strut of the bulls’ argument involves heroic predic- 
tions about the future of work. Workers have missed water cool- 
ers so much, they say, that most are bound to flock back. Die- 
hard sofa-surfers can be persuaded back to the office with new 
rooftop pools, pet-friendly concierges and Michelin-starred 
canteens. Even if some skip a few days a week, the need to space 
out desks in an era of pandemics, and rising appetite for brain- 
storming pods after a year of dreary Zoom calls, should keep de- >» 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


» mand for office space constant. And even if it does not, unwant- 
ed space can always be salvaged by, for instance, converting it in- 
to industrial-chic lofts or logistics centres. 

Such optimism is at best deluded, at worst dishonest. It is too 
early to tell if offices have avoided the pain that months of social 
distancing have caused in other industries. Government help, 
lenient banks and central-bank largesse may have postponed 
delinquencies and distressed sales. Corporate tenants are 
locked into long-term leases which have yet to expire, and may 
not be renewed. Transaction prices are a poor gauge of the mar- 
ket’s health: because buyers and sellers cannot agree on terms 
there have been few sales. In some countries new covid-19 vari- 
ants may prompt restrictions, delaying a full reopening. 

Even small drops in long-run occupancy rates will have a big 
effect on rents and prices. The IMF reckons a rise in vacancy 
rates of five percentage points in all commercial property would 
cause valuations to fall by 15% over five years. Fitch, a rating 
agency, says that if workers in America do not commute at least 
three days a week, valuations could tumble by over half. 

Given that Moody's, arival, predicts a fifth of the country’s of- 
fices will be empty by 2022, landlords may have to brace them- 
selves for worse. Uncertainty is compounded by the indecision 


Leaders 


of many firms. Many still have to make their mind up about hy- 
brid working, which may yet become a new norm. 

Abstract debates about aggregate demand hide the fact that 
property pain will not be evenly shared. As firms seek to lure tal- 
ent and foster teamwork by revamping their HQs, snazzy offices 
in city centres will remain in demand (though making them fan- 
cier, healthier and greener will cost the landlords dearly). 

Yet they are outnumbered by old and poorly ventilated blocks 
which will struggle to lure staff and therefore tenants. Upgrad- 
ing or converting them will often cost a fortune. At best, their 
owners face falling rents or sales at marked-down prices. At 
worst, they risk having capital tied up in stranded assets. 

Cheaper office rents will help some firms. But the financial 
costs are immediate. Banks have lent $2.4trn to commercial 
property in America alone. But they have brought loan-to-value 
ratios down from the dizzying heights of the financial crisis. A 
market correction would probably slap them in the face without 
knocking them out. Instead, more of the bill will fall on equity 
holders, not least pension funds and insurers which, in their 
hunt for returns in an era of low interest rates, have been loading 
up on property for years. The sooner they admit that losses are 
coming, the sooner they can try to limit the damage. @ 


America's crime spike 


Killing reform 


What is the best approach to rising violent crime? 


FTER GEORGE FLOYD'S murder a year ago, Atlanta's mayor 
Arscoiaea the rioters who were smashing up parts of her city. 
“This is not a protest...This is chaos,’ Keisha Lance Bottoms said. 
“If you care about this city, then go home.” The speech was so 
well pitched that some overexcited pundits wondered whether 
she might one day run for president. One year on, Ms Lance Bot- 
toms has declined even to run for re-election as mayor, in part 
because Atlanta is suffering from a violent-crime wave which 
She has been unable to calm. One affluent neighbourhood is 
keen to secede from the city altogether. 

What is true in Atlanta is also true in other American cities. 
Property crimes are down, but violent crime 
has risen. Murders increased by about 30% be- 
tween 2019 and 2020, a rise that shows little 
sign of slowing (see United States section). This 
change puts at risk what has been perhaps the 
most benign social trend in America so far this 
century: the great crime decline. It also threat- 
ens liberal reforms, designed to reduce the pri- 
son population and to rethink policing, which 
have spread across much of the United States in the past decade. 

Arguments for criminal-justice and police reform are easier 
to make when crime is falling, as it had been for 25 years. When 
voters are fearful, they become morte receptive to punitive poli- 
cies. The origins of America’s high incarceration rate, which 
stands at 700 inmates per100,000, compared with 140 in Britain 
and 78 in Germany, lie in the crime wave that lasted from the 
1960s to the 1990s. A new crime wave could result in a repeat. 

Meanwhile, reformers will discover that, if they have nothing 
to say about how to tackle rising crime, they will not be trusted 
to run the city and county offices that control America’s decen- 





tralised justice system. Ms Lance Bottoms is not alone. In other 
cities mayors and prosecutors who thought they would be re- 
warded for championing reform in the name of racial justice are 
finding out that voters prize safety more. 

What, then, should be done? The causes of today’s spike in 
murders are unclear, but probably stem from a mixture of pan- 
demic-related stresses to both civilians and police, rising gun 
sales and reticence among police after the protests inspired by 
Mr Floyd’s death. Police forces say they have not pulled back 
from violent neighbourhoods for fear of inflaming tensions. But 
a Similar murder spike in Baltimore after protests against a high- 
profile police killing in 2015 suggests otherwise. 
Mistrust between the police and those they are 
policing is bad for crime statistics. Without co- 
operation, murders become hard to solve, and 
unsolved murders lead to retaliatory killings. 

Part of the answer lies in restoring that trust 
by promoting community policing and hiring 
more Officers. “Defund the police” is one of the 
most counterproductive political slogans of re- 
cent times and should be cast aside. People in high-crime neigh- 
bourhoods want accountable, effective policing, not the aboli- 
tion of police forces. Reforming police practices, which should 
remain a priority, will be more palatable if budgets are not being 
Slashed at the same time. 

If locking people up eliminated crime, America would alrea- 
dy have eradicated it. The link between crime and incarceration 
is weak. But more imprisonment may be coming unless mayors, 
prosecutors and the police bring the killing spree under control. 
If Mr Floyd’s legacy was a return to mass incarceration and more 
thuggish policing, it would be to pile one tragedy on another. m 


13 


14 Leaders 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Latin America's giant 





Brazil’s dismal decade 


Few countries have fallen so fast. To recover, Brazil must recognise what went wrong 


OSPITALS ARE full, favelas echo with gunfire and a record 
Hin of workers are unemployed. Incredibly, Brazil's econ- 
omy is smaller now than it was in 201—and it will take a lot of 
strong quarters like the one reported on June ist to repair its rep- 
utation. Brazil’s death toll from covid-19 is one of the worst in the 
world. The president, Jair Bolsonaro, jokes that vaccines might 
turn people into crocodiles. 

Brazil’s decline was shockingly fast. After the military dicta- 
torship in 1964-85, the country got a new constitution that re- 
turned the army to barracks, a new currency that ended hyper- 
inflation and social programmes that, with acommodity boom, 
began to ease poverty and inequality. A decade ago the country 
was flush with oil money and had been awarded the 2014 World 
Cup and the 2016 Olympics. It seemed destined to flourish. 

Brazil failed to seize the opportunity. As our special report 
this week argues, consecutive governments made three mis- 
takes. First, they gave in to short-termism and put off liberal eco- 
nomic reforms. Blame for this belongs chiefly with the left-wing 
Workers’ Party, in office in 2003-16. It oversaw growth of 4% a 
year but did not invest to raise productivity. When commodity 
prices fell, Brazil faced one of its worst-ever recessions. The gov- 
ernments of Michel Temer and Mr Bolsonaro made some pro- 
gress on reform, but stopped far short of what is needed. 

Second, in their efforts to shield themselves 
from the fallout of Lava Jato, a huge anti-cor- 
ruption probe, politicians have resisted re- 
forms that would curb graft. The prosecutors 
and judges behind Lava Jato are partly to blame. 
After some were shown to have had a political 
agenda, their probe became bogged down in 
Congress and the courts. 

Finally, Brazil’s political system is a mill- 
stone. State-sized districts and 30 parties in Congress make elec- 
tions expensive. Even more than in other countries, politicians 
tend to back splashy vote-winning projects rather than worthy 
long-term reform. Once in Office, they stick with the flawed rules 
that got them elected. They enjoy legal privileges that make 
them hard to prosecute, and a huge pot of money to help them 
keep power. As a result, Brazilians despise them. In 2018 only 3% 
Said they trusted Congress “a lot”. 

Disillusion paved the way for Mr Bolsonaro. A former army 
captain with a soft spot for the dictatorship, he persuaded voters 
to see his political incorrectness as a mark of authenticity. He 
vowed to purge corrupt politicians, crack down on crime and 
turbocharge the economy. He has failed on all three counts. 

After passing a pensions revamp in 2019, he abandoned the 
agenda of his liberal economy minister, fearing that it would 
cost votes. Tax and public-sector reform and privatisations have 
Stalled. Cash hand-outs helped stave off poverty early in the pan- 
demic, but were slashed at the end of 2020 owing to rising debt. 
The rate of deforestation in the Amazon has soared by over 40% 
since he took office. He has taken a chainsaw to the environment 
ministry, cutting its budget and forcing out staff. His environ- 
ment minister is under investigation for wood-trafficking. 

On covid-19, Mr Bolsonaro has backed anti-lockdown rallies 





and quack cures. He sent planeloads of hydroxychloroquine to 
indigenous tribes. For six months he ignored offers of vaccines. 
One study found the delay may have cost 95,000 lives. 

Rather than tackle graft, he has protected his allies. In April 
2020 he fired the head of the federal police, which is investigat- 
ing his sons for corruption. His justice minister quit, accusing 
him of obstruction of justice. Days earlier, Mr Bolsonaro had 
threatened the independence of the Supreme Court. In February 
his attorney-general shut down the Lava Jato task-force. 

Brazilian democracy is more fragile than at any time since the 
end of the dictatorship. In March Mr Bolsonaro fired the defence 
minister, who reportedly refused to send the army into the 
streets to force businesses to reopen. If he loses re-election in 
2022, some think he may not accept the result. He has cast doubt 
on electronic voting, passed decrees to “arm the public” and 
boasted that “only God” will remove him. 

Actually, Brazil’s Congress could do the job without divine in- 
tervention. His conduct probably qualifies as impeachable, in- 
cluding “crimes of responsibility” such as urging people to defy 
lockdowns, ignoring vaccine offers and firing officials to shield 
his sons. Congress has received 118 impeachment petitions. Tens 
of thousands rallied on May 29th to demand his ejection. 

For now, he has enough support in Congress to block im- 
peachment. Besides, the vice-president, who 
would take over, is a general who is also nostal- 
gic for military rule. The last time Congress im- 
peached a president, Dilma Rousseff in 2016 for 
hiding the size of the budget deficit, it split the 
country. Mr Bolsonaro would cast himself as a 
martyr. Many of his supporters are armed. 

In the long run, as well as replacing Mr Bol- 
sonaro, Brazil must deal with the cynicism and 
despair that got him elected, by tackling chronic low growth and 
inequality. That will require dramatic reform. Yet the very resil- 
ience that has protected Brazil’s institutions from the predations 
of a populist also makes them resistant to beneficial change. 

The actions required are daunting. Above all, the government 
needs to serve the public rather than itself. That means reducing 
the privileges of public-sector workers, which eat up an unsus- 
tainable share of government spending. Politicians must not 
Spare themselves either. Office holders should have fewer legal 
protections. They should shake up the electoral and party sys- 
tems to let new blood into Congress. 

The next government must fight corruption without bias, re- 
strain wasteful spending, and boost competitiveness. A crack- 
down in the Amazon should go hand-in-hand with economic al- 
ternatives to deforestation. Otherwise, sooner or later, new Bol- 
sonaros will emerge. 


A long journey ahead 

Barring Mr Bolsonaro’s impeachment, Brazil’s fate will probably 
be decided by voters next year. His rivals should offer solutions 
rather than peddle nostalgia. His successor will inherit a dam- 
aged and divided country. Unfortunately, the rot goes much 
deeper thanasingle man. @ 











Google 


Helping 
millions of 
businesses 
adapt and 
recover 


G restaurant open now U 


In 1958, Virginia and Ben Ali opened Ben’s 
Chili Bowl in Washington, DC. Today, it’s a 
destination for people from all over the world— 
but when the pandemic hit and Ben's couldn't 
welcome customers inside, they had to adapt. 


In the past year alone, Google has launched 
dozens of ways to help small businesses 
like Ben’s Chill Bowl. By updating their free 
Business Profile on Google with new options 
like curbside pickup and no-contact delivery, 
Virginia and her family kept the restaurant 
going until they were able to open for dine-in 
once again. 


Find free resources for your small business 
at google.com/grow 


a 7T/ Koa 
TME ORIGINAL CHL 





Ben's Chill Bowl 
44*KKKY 
Open « Closes 9PM 


DIRECTIONS CALL SAVE MESSAGE 
ORDER ONLINE 


=—— =X Curbside pickup SY No-contact delivery 














18 





Letters 


Mexico responds 

You urge Mexicans to vote 
against the president and his 
party in elections to Congress 
(“The puritan from Tepetitan, 
May 29th). Your message is 
Surprising, not because of The 
Economist's ideological posi- 
tion, but because of the viru- 
lence of your writing and the 
fragility of your reasoning. You 
seem to believe that the major- 
ity of Mexicans, especially the 
poorest, are wrong and are 
backing the wrong person. 

When Mexico elected An- 
drés Manuel Lopez Obrador as 
president it was predicted that 
he would lead the country to 
economic ruin through deval- 
uations, hyperinflation, indeb- 
tedness and a direct clash with 
the United States. None of this 
has happened. On the contrary, 
the administration of Presi- 
dent Lopez Obrador has ful- 
filled its promise to prioritise 
Spending on our poorest citi- 
zens. At the same time, it has 
maintained fiscal discipline 
and sound public finances. For 
example, it has achieved his- 
toric increases in the mini- 
mum wage, while keeping 
inflation at bay and the cur- 
rency stable. It has also quickly 
succeeded in building a rela- 
tionship of respect and col- 
laboration with the adminis- 
tration of President Joe Biden. 

The failure of the elites to 
understand the president is 
reflected in your pages; they 
paint a bleak picture of Mex- 
ico, losing sight of the fact 
that, although the Mexican 
economy suffered the ravages 
of the pandemic, it will grow 
by around 6% this year, with- 
out having piled on debt, with 
healthy finances and signif- 
icant levels of foreign direct 
investment. You also question 
the government's response to 
covid-19, but overlook how 
Mexico managed, in a matter 
of months, to double its hospi- 
tal capacity and ensure univer- 
sal access to the vaccine. 

But the assertion that 
stands out the most for its 
absurdity is the suggestion 
that President Lopez Obrador 
has somehow undermined 
Mexican democracy, when he 
has done precisely the oppo- 


site. His decades-long struggle 
against a closed system has 
given rise toa strong, plural 
and diverse democracy, in 
which the people are consult- 
ed directly on substantive 
issues as never before. There is 
now full freedom of the press 
and of thought in Mexico. 
President LOpez Obrador is 
accountable to the public and 
engages in a dialogue with the 
press, which feels free to crit- 
icise him at a level incompara- 
ble with his predecessors (just 


open any Mexican newspaper). 


The elitist view, defended 
ad nauseam, is that the major- 
ity is wrong and doesn't know 
what is good for it. Isn't it time 
to ask if it is the elite—angry 
and exasperated with Presi- 
dent Lopez Obrador—and not 
the people that is wrong? 
MARCELO EBRARD 
Secretary of foreign affairs 
Mexico City 


Supporting the patent waiver 
Your work showing that the 
death toll from covid-19 is 
almost certainly far higher 
than we think, especially in 
developing countries, is exem- 
plary. A year ago the barrier to 
battling this cruel disease was 
science. Today it is inequality. 
Contrary to what you submit, 
price is still an obstacle (“Vac- 
cinating the world” May15th). 
The MRNA jabs from Pfizer/ 
BioNTech and Moderna are 
among the most expensive of 
the vaccines on offer, averag- 
ing $18 a dose. 

Shareholders are becoming 
billionaires, while we fail to 
vaccinate the billions who 
need help. These high prices 
are beyond the reach of most 
countries and dramatically 
reduce the number of doses 
that covAx can afford. This is 
despite up to $100bn in public 
subsidy and studies showing 
production costs of as little as 
60 cents a dose for MRNA 
vaccines. A Key way to drive 
down prices and drive up 
Supply is to waive the patents, 
end these artificial monopo- 
lies and transfer technology as 
rapidly as possible to create 
greater competition. 

This is what we learned in 


| the struggle against HIV/AIDS. 


Itis the quickest way to end 
the pandemic, and safeguards 
the populations of rich coun- 
tries from new variants. Given 
your strong commitment to 
the power of the free market it 
is Surprising that you do not 
join Joe Biden and support the 
patent waiver in the face of 
this health emergency. 
WINNIE BYANYIMA 

Executive director 

UNAIDS 

Geneva 





The olive revolution 

Green investing is question- 
able because of the difficulty of 
filtering out the noise from the 
signal (“Hot air’, May 22nd). I 
suggest that some form of 
scale be devised so that com- 
panies can be categorised as, 
Say, green, olive, brown and 
charcoal. Those that have no 
chance of ever being green can 
at least be encouraged to strive 
for olive. 

RICH HASMONEK 

Chicago 





Equities as alternatives 
Your tribute to the late David 
Swensen, who mastered Yale’s 
endowment fund, noted that 
the shift toward “alternative” 
investments of college and 
university endowments began 
in the 1980s (“The holly and the 
ivy’, May 15th). Yale clearly 
benefited from Swensen Stay- 
ing at the forefront of this 
transformation. An earlier 
shift in endowment manage- 
ment began in the1970s. 
McGeorge Bundy, president of 
the Ford Foundation, wrotea 
report in the late 1960s that 
compared the ten-year perfor- 
mance of endowments among 
15 “important educational 
institutions’. Bundy called for 
a move to a modern, profes- 
sional form of investment 
management that was later 
embraced by Swensen. 
Bundy’s report also laid the 
blame for the poor perfor- 
mance of endowments on 
their management by trustee 
committees, stating that their 
focus on maximising income 
led to bond allocations at the 
expense of better-performing 
equities. The report cited the 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


| University of Rochester's 


professional investment 
office, the first in the United 
States, for achieving an annual 
return of 6% a year above the 
other14 endowments. Without 
Bundy’s report supporting 
investment in equities Yale’s 
shift to alternatives might 
never have happened. 
DOUGLAS PHILLIPS 

Chief investment officer 
University of Rochester 
Rochester, New York 


A Dickens of a twist 

A letter (May 15th) wondered 
where Charles Dickens found 
the inspiration to weave fraud- 
ulent pyramid schemes into 
two of his novels. The model 
for the scheme in “Martin 
Chuzzlewit” was the Indepen- 
dent West Middlesex Fire and 
Life Insurance Company. The 
company had its own fire 
engines that dashed round 
putting out fires fora couple of 
years; and life insurance was 
good for profit until too many 
people started dying. When the 
money ran out in 1840 the 
directors divided up the wine 
in the cellar under their head 
office and left for France. 
DAVID PUGSLEY 

Cullompton, Devon 


The infamous Bank of Tipper- 
ary was the inspiration for the 
scheme in “Little Dorrit”. John 
Sadleir, a member of Parlia- 
ment, was the key figure in the 
fraud. His was a standard 
pyramid scheme where depos- 
itors were attracted by high 
interest rates and new deposits 
were constantly required to 
pay out redemptions. When 
his swindling was about to be 
discovered, Sadleir took him- 
self off for a drink at Jack 
Straw’s tavern and followed 
this up with a draught of acid. 
His body was found on 
Hampstead Heath. 

ALI MIREMADI 

Leamington Spa, Warwickshire 


Letters are welcome and should be 
addressed to the Editor at 

The Economist, The Adelphi Building, 
1-11 John Adam Street, London wc2Nn 6HT 
Email: letters@economist.com 

More letters are available at: 
Economist.com/letters 


Executive focus 19 


ie : a | | | ’ . | | r 
b 2. coe 4 i i ' Ly 1 
; | | __! 
~% ——— 








Unique Access to Confidential Opportunities 





InterExec is the global leader in enabling Top Executives _ 
to access $200k to $2m+ unadvertised vacancies worldwide. lr) { 


od — ff \' r 1 
We act discreetly through a 15,000 strong international network. UNIQUE NETWORK # OUTSTANDING 


london@interexec.net www.interexec.net +44 (0)20 7256 5085 


Director of Commercialisation, °° ""** 


aT FSA AG adqu Thi! i 


Industry & Procurement | in Paris, France 


E -, + a q r 7 ~ 1 | , 
pean Space Agency [ESA] is Europe's gateway to space. [ts missin 
Europe's space capability and ensure that investment in spac 
; 


1 ihe World 





Oe) os B sleter @ opel plete)! 
nowteach.org.uk 





Briefing Corporate Europe 


The Economist June 5th 2021 





The land that ambition forgot 


BERLIN AND PARIS 


Once a corporate heavyweight, Europe is now an also-ran. 


Can it recover its footing? 


N 1984 A besuited 20-something Ameri- 
| bas executive on a visit to France offered 
Europeans a few tips for corporate success. 
Entrepreneurs needed to be given a second 
chance if they failed and government bu- 
reaucrats made for lousy investors, he told 
a television interviewer. His advice was 
sage. But European companies ruled the 
global corporate roost alongside those of 
America and, occasionally, Japan. Why 
should they take advice from this uppity 
Californian newcomer? 

Nearly four decades later the company 
founded by that young upstart, Steve Jobs, 
is worth more than the 30 firms in the Ger- 
man blue-chip DAx index combined. Its 
value is not far off that of all 40 companies 
in France’s CAC index. Apple’s success has 
been notable, but it is the decline of cor- 
porate Europe that is truly striking. At the 
Start of the 21st century 410f the world’s 100 
most valuable companies were based in 
Europe (including Britain and Switzerland 
but excluding Russia and Turkey). Today 
only 15 are (See chart1o0n next page). 

When it comes to business, Europe 
used to pack a punch. In recent decades 
companies such as Nokia, Nestlé or BP 
have been among the world’s ten biggest 
firms by market capitalisation. Now only 
on occasion does Europe have a firm in the 
top 20 globally. In 2000 nearly a third of the 
combined value of the world’s 1,000 big- 


gest listed firms was in Europe, and a quar- 
ter of their profits. In just 20 years those 
figures have fallen by almost half. Europe 
is a place for companies such as Amazon 
and TikTok to find customers, not a base 
for local firms to conquer the world. 

Some of Europe's lost stature is down to 
the rise of China. But American firms have 
reinforced their position at the vanguard 
of global business. European ones, along- 
side those from Japan, have not. In 2000 
Europe had a share of corporate wealth 
commensurate with its roughly one-third 
of the world economy. That is no longer 
true (see chart 2 on subsequent page). 

Some Europeans might ask: et alors? 
Many on the continent are ambivalent 
about big business, preferring a dense col- 
lection of midsized firms, such as the Ger- 
man Mittelstand, to corporate goliaths. But 
if it continues, the waning of Europe's 
business will bring consequences. Big 
firms invest in innovation, which boosts 
economic growth. Left to regulate only for- 
eign groups, Europe's ability to shape glo- 
bal business norms—on privacy, say, or the 
uses of artificial intelligence—will look 





weak. European policymakers’ cries for 
“strategic autonomy’ will come to nothing 
without corporate backing. 

Plenty of European companies still 
make consumers swoon. LVMH of France 
flogs Louis Vuitton handbags from Beijing 


to Buenos Aires; German cars and Swiss 
pharmaceuticals are sought-after around 
the world; and homes are stocked with pro- 
ducts made by Unilever, an Anglo-Dutch 
giant and IKEA, a Swedish forest-feller. But 
look at who dominates the global cor- 
porate economy, and Europe’s geopolitical 
rivals now prevail. 

When it comes to big business, Ameri- 
ca, the spiritual home of free-market capi- 
talism, has been on top for decades. It is 
the ascent of Asia that has rejigged the glo- 
bal corporate landscape. China's rapid eco- 
nomic growth has spawned corporate ti- 
tans to match. Over160 of the world’s 1,000 
most valuable firms are now Chinese, a 
fourfold rise in two decades. 


Ne me quitte pas 

Assuming that Chinese firms would have 
gate-crashed the Fortune Global 500, which 
ranks the world’s biggest companies by 
revenue, in relative terms it was inevitable 
that some Western firms would be nudged 
out of the global elite. That left European 
firms vying with American ones to stay 
dominant. It is in this tussle that Europe 
has fallen by the wayside. In 2000 the 100 
biggest firms in Europe were worth 
$4.6trn, rising to $8.9trn now. America’s 
equivalent companies started at $7.4trn 
but are now worth $26trn. (China’s top 100 
firms are worth $8.8trn.) 

How did European companies fall be- 
hind their American competitors? The first 
reason is that its firms seem to have been 
outmanaged. Look at firms competing in 
the same sector over the past 20 years, and 
incumbent American companies more of- 
ten than not went on to churn out bigger 
profits and are better positioned for future 
success than their European counterparts. 


There are many exceptions to this rule: >> 





The Economist June 5th 2021 


» Siemens of Germany has outshone its in- 
dustrial rival General Electric, for example, 
and Airbus, based in France, has had fewer 
problems of late putting jets together than 
Boeing, its American foe. But by and large 
it has been better to bet on Nike of America 
over Adidas of Germany; JPMorgan Chase 
in New York over Credit Suisse in Zurich, 
or America’s Walmart over France’s Carre- 
four. Their advantage in terms of profits 
and sales growth is often small, but com- 
pounds over time. 

A second reason Europe fell behind in 
recent decades is that its biggest firms are 
in the wrong industries. The sectors Euro- 
pean firms dominated 20 years ago, such 
as insurance or telecoms, have grown ata 
glacial pace. Even if European firms did 
well, as many did, they mattered less as the 
world moved on. America, by contrast, had 
already made significant inroads into soft- 
ware and e-commerce, industries that 
would soon redefine the global economy 
and generate trillion-dollar valuations. 

The third, and most striking, reason Eu- 
rope has fallen behind is the lack of newly 
created firms in its blue-chip indices. Ma- 
ny of the biggest companies in America, 
such as Amazon, Netflix, Tesla or Face- 
book, are young enough to be run by their 
founders. In Europe old names prevail. 

Of the world’s 142 listed firms worth ov- 
er $100bn, 43 were set up from scratch in 
the past half-century, 27 in America and 
ten in China. Only one was in Europe: SAP, 
a German software group founded in 1972. 
Half of Europe’s richest ten billionaires in- 
herited fortunes spawned long ago; in 
America nine of the top ten are wealthy 
solely because of companies they founded. 

Many—but by no means all—of the 
American newcomers are in tech. That has 
led policymakers and business leaders in 
Europe to make light of the problem. The 





oe! 
If only we could turn back time 


Top 100 companies by market capitalisation 
World, % of total 


Rest of world 
100 


China MJapan WM Asia-Pacific* 


United States 





2000 05 10 15 21T 


Sources: Bloomberg; 
The Economist 


“Excluding China and Japan 
Tune 1st 


failure by France or Germany to build big 
new firms is regrettable, they concede, but 
America has merely stolen a march in the 
consumer-internet realm. Silicon Valley 
was the right place to be at the right time to 
build this new generation of firms: a felici- 
tous nexus of universities and research in- 
stitutes, venture capital and America’s 
consumer-first reflexes. When that bubble 
bursts, new business models will emerge 
that Europe will be ready to seize. 


It’s more fun to compute 
In fact, the absence of European tech giants 
is symptomatic of an entrepreneurial defi- 
ciency that transcends the world of apps 
and clicks. America’s nous at creating new 
companies—and Europe’s failure to match 
it—extends beyond Silicon Valley, argues 
Thomas Philippon of New York University. 
A global chain of cafés might have been 
expected to hail from Italy, home of the 
espresso and barista. Instead Starbucks 
has overrun the world, despite America’s 
reputation for insipid coffee. A green car 
giant should have emerged from Europe, 


Briefing Corporate Europe 


which has a proud engineering tradition 
and is at the forefront of environmental 
regulation. Yet it is an American newcom- 
er, Tesla, that is now worth roughly as 
much as every other American and Euro- 
pean carmaker combined (see Business 
section). Why could Britain’s or Switzer- 
land’s storied financiers not have created 
an asset-management giant to dominate 
the markets? Today it is BlackRock, set up 
in 1988, which manages $otrn of global in- 
vestments from New York. 

Each of these has found success in its 
own way. But a combination of factors 
helped propel them to global corporate su- 
perstardom. The ability to raise ample cap- 
ital, from private investors to large pen- 
sion funds, is a recurring theme in Ameri- 
ca that is all too often missing in Europe. 
So too is the belief that a company that de- 
velops a better product will, eventually, 
displace incumbents, however powerful. 

The balance is unlikely to shift in Eu- 
rope’s favour any time soon. The pipeline 
to become the world’s next trillion-dollar 
company is stuffed with firms from Amer- 
icaand China, not Britain or Spain. Accord- 
ing to PitchBook, a data provider, in the 
past decade venture capitalists have 
backed 661 companies that went on to be 
worth over $1bn. Only 78 of these “uni- 
corns” are in Europe, worth 8% of the 661 
firms’ over-$2.5trn total. 

Disentangling the cause of Europe’s 
corporate malaise from its consequences 
is tricky. One reason frequently cited is the 
economy: how could European companies 
be expected to do well when the European 
economy fared so poorly since 2000? And 
indeed its share of global Gpp has trended 
down (see chart 3 on next page) as emerg- 
ing markets have grown faster. But that of- 
fers only a partial explanation. 


21 


In the past 20 years, in absolute terms >> 


22 


Briefing Corporate Europe 


» Europe has added as much additional eco- 


nomic output as America—roughly $1o0trn 
each. (China added $14trn by growing ata 
faster rate but from a smaller base.) That is 
partly because of Europe's larger popula- 
tion. European GpDP per head is about two- 
thirds that of America. The figure has not 
fallen in the past 20 years thanks mostly to 
poorer eastern Europeans getting closer to 
Western income levels. 

Looking at European GDP as a whole as- 
sumes firms there have access to the entire 
economic zone. Too often they do not. In 
theory the Eu offers its firms and citizens a 
“single market” stretching across much of 
the continent (though no longer to Britain, 
one of the biggest economies). In practice 
itis a part-built edifice. It is still fiddly fora 
bank in Portugal to offer services in Fin- 
land—much harder than for a Californian 
bank to expand to Texas. 

Beyond linguistic and cultural differ- 
ences, legal complexities often get in the 
way. “When [European] companies think 
of their home market, they usually think of 
their home country, not of Europe,” says 
Carl-Henric Svanberg, chairman of Volvo, a 
Swedish lorry maker, and of the European 
Round Table for Industry, which repre- 
sents large companies. 

These internal barriers mean Europe 
has many smaller firms operating at na- 
tional, not continental, scale. Each country 
tends to have its own banks, utilities, air- 
lines and supermarkets. (Europe has over 
100 mobile operators, compared with a 
handful in America or China.) These lack 
the economies of scale and opportunities 
to grow quickly enjoyed by firms plying the 
American or Chinese markets. 

In the absence of easy opportunities at 
home, European firms have expanded 
overseas more zealously than their Ameri- 
can counterparts. Firms in richer coun- 
tries in Europe, the source of most of its 
multinationals, now generate over half 
their income elsewhere, up from just over 
a quarter in 1997, according to Morgan 
Stanley, a bank. That includes around a 
third from poor countries; large German 
firms now Sell more to emerging markets 
than they do domestically. American 
groups generate over 70% of their income 
locally. That can make managing European 
companies acase of constantly putting out 
fires in far-flung subsidiaries. 

At home, European companies com- 
plain that they face a less favourable busi- 
ness environment. Europe’s brand of capi- 
talism is often softened by a stronger role 
for unions. That has its allure, as workers 
toil shorter hours and enjoy greater job se- 
curity. It also means higher labour costs. 
The political protection afforded business- 
es—from hostile takeovers, say, which are 
rare in mainland Europe—is one reason 
their financial results are underwhelming. 

Europe's smaller firms now find them- 


ioe) 
This is the world we live in 
Europe, % of world total 


GDP* 







Market capitalisationt 


“P Port ee yp pp ft © © fT ff fF ft YT Ff 2 © eg 
2000 05 10 ls 20 


*EU27 plus Britain, Norway and Switzerland 
TMSCI Europe as % of MSCI All-Country World Index 
Sources: IMF; Refinitiv Datastream 


selves competing against global behe- 
moths with inbuilt advantages. Large firms 
can afford to buy and try new technology, 
borrow at cheaper rates and absorb fixed 
costs more efficiently. They tend to spend 
relatively more on research and develop- 
ment. The dearth of big companies helps 
explain why European spending on re- 
search, at 2.1% of GDP, is below the average 
of the OECD, a group of mostly rich nations. 


Que reste-t-1l de nos amours? 
Even as Europe has fallen out of business 
league tables, it has continued to play a 
role as a global regulator. Sometimes that 
has seemed its main contribution to the 
global business landscape: look at rules on 
privacy or combating climate change. Be- 
cause standards set by the European Com- 
mission are often the most stringent in the 
world, and businesses want to build a sin- 
gle set of products for all markets globally, 
they often end up applying across the 
world. But EU rulemaking that applies in 
effect only to foreign firms—as does much 
of the tech regulation devised in Brussels— 
has increasingly been attacked as covert 
protectionism. Currently a rulemaker, Eu- 
rope may risk losing that position. 
European policymakers are well aware 
of Europe's relative decline. They point to 
mitigating factors. Some corporate giants 


Ss 

Harder, better, faster, stronger 
Market capitalisation of venture-backed 
companies valued at over $1bn 

$trn 


125 


1.00 


United — 3 





2011 ie 15 17 WS De 


Source: PitchBook *June 2nd 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


in America profit from areas which in Eu- 
rope are the responsibility of the state— 
running hospitals or railways. Others such 
as airlines and mobile carriers are monop- 
olies that bilk customers. And can profits 
or market capitalisation truly reflect the 
value of acompany to society? 

There has also been a return to Euro- 
pean dirigiste reflexes. If the private sector 
has proved unable to grow firms that area 
match for global titans, perhaps politicians 
can help? More overt intervention by the 
public sector in the economy—both help- 
ing European firms and stymieing their 
competitors—was increasing before co- 
vid-19. The pandemic has turbocharged it. 

Under the banner of promoting Eu- 
rope’s “strategic autonomy’, rules prevent- 
ing takeovers of some European firms by 
foreign rivals have been bolstered. Propos- 
als are being developed to hamper foreign 
companies backed by non-EU govern- 
ments who wish to do business in Eu- 
rope—a measure plainly aimed at China. 
Talk has grown of a “carbon border tax” to 
ensure European firms are not at a disad- 
vantage when competing against challeng- 
ers from places with less ambitious cli- 
mate-protection policies. 

France and Germany are among those 
who have demanded the Eu stop blocking 
favoured mergers of big European firms in- 
to pan-continental champions, despite the 
Scepticism of antitrust regulators. Politi- 
Clans are willing to shovel public money 
into industry in the hope of guiding its pri- 
orities—the idea of “picking winners”, 
popular in the 1970s, has made a come- 
back. Myriad state-backed investments are 
happening in green technologies. France 
has revived the position of “high commis- 
sioner for planning”. Across the continent 
public funds are being invested in every- 
thing from startups to large listed firms. 


Hast du etwas Zeit fiir mich? 
Europe's boosters see plenty of corporate 
life left there. From utilities to power ma- 
jors, firms in Europe have gone further 
than others in greening themselves. Those 
in other parts of the world will have to fol- 
low suit at some point. European universi- 
ties remain world-class. But Europe also 
has unique challenges. One is demogra- 
phy: the old continent is living up to its 
name. There are more over-65s than un- 
der-15s nowadays and populists across the 
EU make it hard to boost immigration. 
That leaves few levers to pull to help Eu- 
rope’s firms compete globally. The most 
obvious, deepening the single market, has 
fallen off the political agenda. Helping law 
firms and software designers sell across 
the continent seamlessly lacks the pizzazz 
of picking industrial winners. But stiffen- 
ing competition in Europe is key to creat- 
ing firms fit for corporate glory. The path to 
global business begins athome. @ 


Reality bites 


ATLANTA 


A surge in violent crime poses a risk to life, and to criminal-justice reform 


FTER THE Sweet tea was poured but be- 

fore the tomato soup arrived, in the 
middle of a crowded restaurant, Bill White 
lifted his shirt-tail to reveal the rubberised 
erip of a .38 revolver. “Everyone's got one 
these days,’ he says. Over lunch, he and 
two other residents of Buckhead, the 
wealthy northern section of Atlanta, swap 
Stories: packs of cars blocking intersec- 
tions for illegal street races, would-be 
thieves casing houses, neighbours too 
frightened to leave their homes. Lenox 
Square, an upscale mall, installed metal 
detectors after a spate of shootings. Mr 
White is head of fundraising for the Buck- 
head Exploratory Committee—a group of 
residents who have organised to push for 
Buckhead’s independence from Atlanta, 
driven, he explains, by three factors: 
“crime, crime and crime”. 

As of May 16th, murders were up by 59% 
in Atlanta compared with the same period 
in 2020. Rapes, aggravated assaults and 
thefts from and of cars are also well above 
levels in 2020. Nor is this just an Atlanta 
problem. Nationally, the spike in murders 
that began in 2020—according to data 
from the Major Cities Chiefs Association, 


homicides in American cities rose by 33% 
from 2019 to 2020—shows no sign of abat- 
ing. This is a problem first, of course, for 
the people living in the neighbourhoods 
where much of this violence takes place. 
But it also poses a problem for advocates of 
criminal-justice reform, who made great 
Strides in the 2010s, when violent crime 
was falling. Convincing people to back 
lighter sentences and decrease their reli- 
ance on police when murders are rising 
may prove more difficult. 

The reasons why murder rates are on 


24 Sins of commission in Congress 
25 Funding scientific research 

26 Livinginavan 

26 Horseracing and drugs 

27 Covid-19 and racial disparities 
27 The hunger wanes 


28 Lexington: At home with the 
redoubtable Frederick Keys 





the rise nationally remain unclear. In fact 
criminologists are still debating why crime 
fell in the 1990s and 2000s. The pandemic 
closed schools and other institutions, leav- 
ing young people unoccupied and anxious. 
Police who might otherwise have been de- 
ployed to high-crime neighbourhoods or 
investigative duty were assigned to re- 
spond to protests. Gun sales soared, and 
many faced financial hardships and other 
stresses. But violent-crime rates were ris- 
ing, albeit more slowly than over the past 
14 months, even before the covid-19 epi- 
demic began, beginning in 2014. 

Whatever the reason, “homicides can 
be sticky”, says John Pfaff of Fordham Uni- 
versity in New York. “A shooting in March 
can lead to a subsequent shooting in July, 
when retaliation comes up.’ In other 
words, even if the pandemic is partly re- 
sponsible for the homicide spike, any post- 
pandemic decline may well be gradual. 

As aresult, crime now has a political sa- 
lience that it has not had in years. A poll re- 
leased last month showed crime was the 
second-most-important issue (behind co- 
vid-19) for Democrats in New York, who 
will choose a mayoral candidate in a prim- 
ary on June 22nd. Eric Adams, a former po- 
lice officer who has recently defended the 
use of stop-and-frisk tactics and made 
public safety the centre of his campaign, 
leads insome polls. Jenny Durkan, Seattle’s 
mayor, has faced criticism from both the 
right and left over her handling of the city’s 
police-free “autonomous zone’ and tactics 
used by police against protesters; she will 
not seek another term. Chesa Boudin, San | 


24 United States 


» Francisco’s district attorney, faces a recall 
campaign, driven by the perception that he 
is too soft on crime. Crime has become 
central in the race to succeed Keisha Lance 
Bottoms, Atlanta’s mayor, who also unex- 
pectedly declined to seek a second term. 

But before she leaves office, she plans to 
hire another 250 police officers. Other cit- 
ies have taken a similar approach. Minne- 
apolis, where a majority of the city council 
voted last year to defund and disband the 
police department, will spend $6.4m to 
hire new officers. While president of Balti- 
more’s city council, Brandon Scott champi- 
oned a measure to cut the police depart- 
ment’s budget by $22.4m; since taking of- 
fice last December as mayor, he has pro- 
posed increasing it by $28m. Oakland will 
soon restore most of the $29m it cut from 
the police budget last year. 

Such reversals testify more to the politi- 
cal than the budgetary costs of criminal- 
justice reform. But that does not mean re- 
form is doomed, or that all voters will re- 
ject all reform-minded candidates. Last 
month Tishaura Jones was elected mayor 
of St Louis on a platform that included re- 
ducing reliance on police and closing one 
of the city’s prisons. In a primary race on 
May 18th, Larry Krasner, Philadelphia’s cru- 
sading district attorney, trounced his po- 
lice-union-backed opponent. On _ that 
Same day, Ed Gainey, running on a reform- 
ist platform, defeated Bill Peduto in a prim- 
ary election. He is poised to become Pitts- 
burgh’s first black mayor. 

Still, blame-mongering for violence is 
an effective cudgel for conservative state- 
level politicians to wield against liberal cit- 
ies. Brian Kemp, Georgia’s Republican go- 
vernor, is making Atlanta crime central to 
his re-election campaign—the better to 
win back Trump-hesitant Republicans in 
the city’s suburbs. Florida has passed a law 
that lets the governor and his cabinet re- 
verse any changes to cities’ police budgets 
that they deem unwise. Other states have 
proposed (and Texas has passed) measures 
cutting off funds to cities that slash police 
budgets. Unlike states, which the Tenth 
Amendment protects against federal over- 
reach, cities are subsidiary creations of the 
State, and have no legal shield against 
these sorts of pre-emptive measures. 

Reformers will have to change how they 
pitch theirideas. They cannot simply make 
a moral case. The impetus that led conser- 
vative and liberal states alike to reduce 
their prison populations in recent years 
was largely to save money. And, as Mr Pfaff 
notes, homicides are up nationwide, so if 
rising violent-crime rates indict reform in 
liberal cities, they must also indict the sta- 
tus quo in more conservative areas that 
have not pursued reform. 

“The rise in violence just makes every- 
thing related to these debates over how to 
reform policing and how to deal with po- 


lice violence more difficult,” explains Pat- 
rick Sharkey, a sociologist at Princeton 
University. “There’s a knee-jerk response 
because we've been so reliant on police 
and prisons as the institutions we turn to 
to deal with violence.” Faced with a choice 
between more and less policing, people 
frightened of violent crime will rarely 
choose less. 

In fact the choice is not binary. Police 
play a crucial role in fighting crime and, in 
the near term, cities may require a more ro- 
bust police presence than some reformers 


Congress 


Sins of commission 


WASHINGTON, DC 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


would like. They do not play the only role, 
however. A wealth of evidence exists that 
other institutions—anti-violence non- 
profits, drug-treatment programmes, sum- 
mer jobs for young people—also help. Poli- 
ticlans who want to reduce violent crime 
in their cities and states should remember 
that, just as activists should remember 
that reform is a harder sell when people do 
not feel safe. Because, since murders usu- 
ally rise in the summer, when people are 
outin the streets until late, safety is unlike- 
ly to return soon. 


The failure of the January 6th commission illustrates the two main weaknesses of 


America’s democracy 


T WAS THE distilled essence of legislative 
dysfunction. On May 28th the Senate re- 
jected a painstakingly negotiated biparti- 
san bill that would have set up a commis- 
sion to study the storming of the Capitol 
building by incensed Donald Trump sup- 
porters on January 6th. Though the vote 
was 54 in favour and 35 opposed (all of 
them Republicans), the measure techni- 
cally failed, because a filibuster—ostensi- 
bly the threat of debating a bill to death— 
requires 60 votes to avoid it. This flop puts 
two serious problems with American de- 
mocracy in relief. One is that Congress can 
be hamstrung by a minority. The other is 
that the Republican Party is unwilling to 
escape the shackles of Trumpism. 
Start with the filibuster rule and its re- 
sult. It would be hard to concoct a clearer 





Look away now 


demonstration of what is wrong with the 
rule as it currently functions. It did not 
matter that 60% of those present voted in 
favour of the commission, nor that the op- 
ponents of the bill really had no intention 
of debating it. Indeed, the blocking of the 
commission shows that the majority of 
elected Republicans wish not to discuss 
the attack on the Capitol, as if it could be 
shushed away like a child’s nightmare. 

Many Democrats, who hold majorities 
in both chambers, hope that the death of 
the commission may also hasten the death 
of the filibuster itself, thus allowing them 
to legislate without needing ten Republi- 
can votes that will probably never materi- 
alise. Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority 
leader, plans to move forward with voting- 
rights legislation by the end of June. Party 
activists believe this bill represents the 
best chance of breaking the filibuster’s 
stranglehold over the chamber. Filibuster 
rules have been slowly chiselled away over 
the past few decades: first to allow the con- 
firmation of executive-branch appointees 
by simple majority, and, later, justices to 
the Supreme Court. A further whittling by 
exempting voting-rights and civil-rights 
legislation could be in order. 

Tweaking the rules, or dismantling 
them entirely, would take just a simple ma- 
jority of senators, which Democrats pos- 
sess by the narrowest margin possible. But 
two conservative Democrats—Joe Man- 
chin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema 
of Arizona—remain staunch opponents of 
filibuster reform. Both of them attempted 
to drum-up Republican support for the 
commission, without much to show for it 
(Ms Sinema skipped the vote altogether). 
Activists hope that their failure will per- 
manently shake their confidence in the fil- 
ibuster, which after all is often justified on >> 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


>the ground that it promotes bipartisan- 
ship. But both seem unlikely to budge, 

The other upshot is that Republicans 
remain in no mood for introspection. After 
a few brief weeks of being clear-eyed about 
who inspired the attack and what it meant, 
Congressional Republicans lost their appe- 
tite for moving beyond Trumpism. True 
believers in Mr Trump’s conspiracy theory 
of electoral fraud have every incentive to 
continue; meanwhile those merely going 
along out of cravenness or opportunism 
have no incentive to speak up. 

The party's congressional leaders, 
Mitch McConnell in the Senate and Kevin 
McCarthy in the House of Representatives, 
have reverted from antipathy for the for- 
mer president to accommodating him. In 
the immediate aftermath of the attack, Mr 
McCarthy said that the president was 
“practically and morally responsible for 
provoking the events of the day”. His depu- 
ties negotiated the contours of the would- 
be commission; then he voted against it. 
Mr McConnell, who denounced Mr Trump 
forcefully in February, whipped against the 
bill’s passage in the Senate (calling it a 
“purely political exercise” for Democrats 
who “would like to continue to debate 
things that occurred in the past”). 

This is but the latest warning sign to 
flash. On May 30th, Republicans in Texas 
were only narrowly thwarted from passing 
some of the strictest voting rules in the 
country when Democrats staged a walkout, 
denying a quorum. States have enacted 22 
restrictive new voting laws this year as a re- 
sponse to Mr Trump’s false allegations of 
fraud. More than six months after the elec- 
tion, conspiracists in Arizona are still 
counting and recounting the ballots that 
gave President Joe Biden a narrow win in 
the state, hunting for traces of bamboo fi- 
bres in the paper ballots to show that they 
were imported from Asia. 

The party recently dumped Liz Cheney, 
a staunchly conservative Republican rep- 
resentative, from her leadership post for 
the sin of not adopting the requisite omerta 
towards Mr Trump’s anti-democratic ten- 
dencies. On June 1st, over 100 prominent 
American political scientists and scholars 
signed an open letter warning that some 
States “no longer meet the minimum con- 
ditions for free and fair elections” and that 
“our entire democracy is now at risk”. 

The odds that concerned Republicans 
can reverse, or even Stall, their party’s slide 
look remote. Mr Trump remains the party’s 
de facto leader, and barring a health crisis 
(or an indictment), plans to run for presi- 
dent again. Having demonstrated his ver- 
sion of the anti-democratic playbook—de- 
nouncing the legitimacy of lost elections 
and trying to break the constitutional 
guardrails against reversing the results— 
Mr Trump, or some imitator, might well try 
the same again. @ 





Endless Frontier Act 


Political science 


LOS ANGELES 
Congress is set to make a 
down-payment on innovation 


ENATOR HARLEY KILGORE, a West Vir- 
S cinia oil prospector’s son who carried 
around a horse chestnut for good luck, had 
a vision for American science. It was too 
dominated, he thought, by big business 
and by the university system: the country’s 
practical needs were an afterthought. In 
1942 Kilgore proposed creating a federal 
bureaucracy, responsive to the public, that 
would guide scientific research for the 
good of the country and distribute its 
benefits geographically. 

Kilgore was opposed by Vannevar Bush 
(pictured above), who led American R&D 
during the second world war. Bush felt that 
scientific research should be directed by 
the scientists themselves. In a report for 
the president called “Science: The Endless 
Frontier’, Bush summarised his ideas. 
Government, he said, should fund re- 
search. But rather than direct this research 
towards meeting social needs, it should in- 
Stead seek to advance science for its own 
Sake: basic, not applied, science was to be 
the primary objective. Bush won the day. 
The National Science Foundation (NSF), 
born in 1950, has largely followed the prin- 
ciples he laid out. 

Kilgore is about to get his revenge. The 
Senate will probably soon pass the us In- 
novation and Competition Act, known un- 
til recently as the Endless Frontier Act. 
Though the bill is named after Bush’s re- 


United States 


port, it will take American science policy in 
a more Kilgorian direction. It lays out ten 
“key technology focus areas,” such as artifi- 
cial intelligence, biotechnology and ad- 
vanced materials science, to which new re- 
search funding will be directed. It allocates 
funding for regional tech hubs spread 
across the country. And its objectives are 
clear: the goal, in true Kilgorian fashion, is 
to “enhance the competitive advantage and 
leadership of the United States in the glo- 
bal economy’. 

When it was first introduced in May 
2020, the Endless Frontier Act planned to 
set aside $100bn for a new Directorate for 
Technology and Innovation within the 
NSF. This would have borrowed character- 
istics from the Defence Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA), the military-re- 
search office responsible for spearheading 
research that led to the internet, the com- 
puter mouse and MRNA vaccines (see Sci- 
ence and technology section). 

The act’s ambitions have since nar- 
rowed. Instead of the full $100bn, the NSF’s 
new tech directorate will get $4bn. Some of 
the money has gone to pork. A significant 
portion has been diverted to the Depart- 
ment of Energy’s national labs. Though 
more than $50bn of funding will go to NSF, 
much of it either replaces existing funding 
or is earmarked for causes other than R&D, 
such as STEM education. 

Innovation experts advise against look- 
ing a gift horse in the mouth, however. 
Federal spending on research has fallen 
from more than 1.2% of GDP 1n 1976 to less 
than 0.8% today. As a portion of the federal 
budget, it has dropped from12% at its1960s 
peak to 3%. The money set aside for R&D in 
the new bill will not reverse this slide. But 
the law will still deliver substantial addi- 
tional funding to the NSF: Its budget for 
2022 will be 27% higher than in 2021 and 
will double over the next five years. Jona- 
than Gruber of the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, whose work helped to spur 
the legislation, views the act as a “down 
payment” towards future innovation. 

Others view it as a missed opportunity. 
Samuel Hammond of the Niskanen Centre, 
a think-tank, acknowledges that the influx 
of cash is valuable, but pines for what 
might have been. Science, he says, needs 
not just new funding but new institutions 
as well. Some researchers spend more than 
40% of their time on administrative tasks 
such as grant-writing. Studies have found 
grant evaluations are inconsistent and 
subjective. Since the number of grant ap- 
plications has increased faster than avail- 
able funding, high-quality work may lan- 
guish unfunded. And though scientists 
tend to do their best work in their younger 
years, the recipients of research grants 
have been getting steadily older. 

Mr Hammond believes that govern- 


25 


ment agencies that fund research have be- >> 


26 United States 


» come sclerotic: he sees a “compliance cul- 
ture” resulting from a risk-averse leader- 
ship wary of heavy-handed congressional 
oversight. That is a problem, says Benja- 
min Reinhardt, an independent researcher 
who has studied DARPA, because big wins 
come from taking risks. “All the value,” he 
Says, “is in the long tail.” 

One reason to create new research- 
funding institutions is to turn the scientif- 
ic process on itself. Some economists have 


Suggested prizes for big breakthroughs. 
New Zealand has experimented with lot- 
teries for grant funding. Two researchers, 
Adam Marblestone and Sam Rodriques, 
have proposed Focused Research Organi- 
sations, stand-alone research efforts con- 
centrated on solving single, well-defined 
science or technology problems. 

Mr Gruber agrees that existing funding 
agencies are too conservative, and wishes 
the bill were bigger. But he believes it is a 


Vanity projects 


LONGMONT, COLORADO 
The epidemic pushed more Americans to try a nomadic lifestyle 


N 2019 LUCY JACOBSON and her col- 
leagues at Rossmonster Vans flew to 
San Francisco carrying “suitcases full of 

cash”. They were on their way to pur- 
chase five retro Volkswagen vans made 
in the 1980s in order to drive them back 
to Longmont, Colorado and turn them 
into custom adventure-mobiles. The 
road trip home took them to Las Vegas 
(“to let our freak flag fly”), through Utah's 
canyons and over the Rockies. It was the 
kind of expedition increasing numbers 
of Americans are hankering for. 

About140,000 vans, RVs or boats were 
counted as housing units in 2019 accord- 
ing to the Census Bureau, up from about 
102,000 in 2016. The circumstances of 
people who live in their vans can be 
glaringly different. On one end of the 
spectrum are those who, like the folks in 
Jessica Bruder’s book “Nomadland” have 
little alternative. On the other end are 
van lifers or “digital nomads” who covet 
a bohemian, go-anywhere lifestyle. Type 
#VanLife into Instagram and more than 
10m posts appear. Most photos feature 
pristine Western landscapes, some kind 
of van or mobile home that resembles a 
Manhattan studio apartment on wheels, 
and at least one smiling 20-something. 
Dogs are a popular accessory. 

As social-media influencers spread 
the van-life gospel, a lucrative industry 
blossomed. A custom van renovation at 
RossmoOnster costs customers anywhere 
from $50,000 to $100,000—not includ- 
ing the cost of the van itself. Dave Walsh, 
the founder of Vanlife Customs in Den- 
ver, Says he has seen revenues grow by at 
least 50% every year since his company’s 
founding in 2016. 

When the pandemic hit, things 
looked bleak. National parks closed, 
leaving fewer picturesque places to 
camp. Jeff Cavins, a co-founder of Out- 
doorsy, an Airbnb-esque marketplace for 
van and camper rentals, says 95% of the 
firm’s bookings were cancelled. Then, 


et 





Doing it for the ‘gra m_ 


business boomed. Outdoorsy’s bookings 
rocketed by 4,000% between April and 
October of 2020 as parks reopened and 
Americans fled city centres for greener 
places. Dave & Matt Vans in Gypsum, 
Colorado went from five employees in 
early 2020 to nearly 30 today. Rossmon- 
ster can take no new customers until 
September 2022. The trend looks likely to 
continue. Surging house prices and the 
normalisation of remote work may push 
more wannabe nomads out on the road. 

Ask any van lifer why they decided to 
trade their roof for wheels and the word 
“freedom” will inevitably come up. “I 
wanted to travel, was single and free and 
thought ‘Why not try this?’” says Mr 
Walsh. But the lifestyle that has gone 
viral on Instagram is a shiny version of 
what can be a dusty existence. “There's a 
lot of butts and thongs with beautiful 
views behind them”, Mr Walsh adds, “but 
it’s not always a real portrayal of van life.” 
The endless search for parking, toilets 
and wifi might not be so alluring. 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


good start. The promotion of regional tech 
hubs, he says, could result in a virtuous cy- 
cle: once science and technology are no 
longer concentrated on the coasts, Ameri- 
cans may become more receptive to in- 
creases in R&D funding in the future. And, 
in the selection of ten key technology areas 
to focus on, he sees the beginnings of aless 
tentative approach to innovation. “You can 
call it picking winners,” he avers. “I call it 
taking risks.” @ 


Horseracing and drugs 


Off-track 


ELMONT, NEW YORK 
The sport of kings could do with more 
punters and fewer drugs 


(47 T’S A WIN-WIN, Says Zach Noren, who 

I is visiting Belmont Park, a racetrack on 
the border of Long Island and New York Ci- 
ty, with his three-year-old son Jack. “He 
likes the horses and I like to bet.” Mr Noren 
normally pays attention to the “ponies” 
only for Triple Crown events, like the Ken- 
tucky Derby. This is not unusual. There 
were few punters at Belmont on a recent 
Sunday afternoon. The virus may have 
made people wary of placing a flutter in 
person, but interest in racing has been 
dwindling for years. 

The public perception that the horses 
are mistreated or over-medicated has con- 
tributed to that. Part of the problem, says 
Bennett Liebman of Albany Law School, is 
that there is no regular mainstream sports 
coverage of racing. “Any time somebody 
covers horse racing, outside of the Triple 
Crown, the news tends to be bad.” There 
has been no shortage of bad news lately. 
Medina Spirit, the winner of the Kentucky 
Derby, tested positive for an excessive 
amount of betamethasone, an anti-inflam- 
matory drug permitted only in limited 
amounts. On June 2nd Churchill Downs, 
home of the Kentucky Derby, suspended 
Bob Baffert, Medina Spirit’s trainer, for two 
years. Last month the New York Racing Au- 
thority banned him from its tracks, includ- 
ing the Belmont Stakes, the third leg of the 
Triple Crown, taking place on June sth. 

Mr Baffert and his shock of white hair 
are known beyond the stables and grand- 
stand. His horses have won16 Triple Crown 
races, including six Kentucky Derbys, but 
he has also received many medication in- 
fractions, five in 13 months alone. He de- 
nies any wrongdoing. Kathy Guillermo of 
PETA, an animal-rights group, is sceptical. 
She recalls that in 2000, after one of his 
horses tested positive for morphine, Mr 
Baffert testified that it might have eaten a 
poppy-seed bagel. 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Ms Guillermo says that the medicines 
can cause catastrophic injuries and death 
on the track. Some horses are on several, 
known as “stacking”. As long as they are 
within the approved limit, this is allowed. 
But the cumulative damage of masking an 
injury means that a horse is at greater risk 
of collapsing and needing to be put down. 

Forty-nine horses died at the Santa 
Anita track in California during the 2018-19 
fiscal year, according to a report by the Los 
Angeles district attorney. Many had multi- 
ple drugs in their systems on the day they 
died. California eliminated stacking in 
2019. Some trainers complain that the dif- 
ferent rules in each jurisdiction are con- 
fusing. That will soon change, as national 
oversight is coming into the home stretch. 
The Horseracing Integrity and Safety Act 
will require uniform safety standards, in- 
cluding anti-doping and medication con- 
trol. Scott Stanley, a chemist at the Gluck 
Equine Centre, is helping to write the rules. 
He is already seeing fewer medication in- 
fractions in his service lab in Kentucky. 

But racing faces other challenges. IBIS- 
World, a research firm, says the industry is 
ina state of long-term decline. Fewer punt- 
ers means track closures. Arlington Race- 
course outside Chicago, which has just be- 
gun its final season, will be sold for devel- 
opment. Some tracks have diversified into 
slot machines and casinos. Demand has 
eroded as competing entertainment and 
other forms of gambling siphon off poten- 
tial customers. Racing’s loyal fans tend to 
be on the older side. The Triple Crown 
events still retain interest, but a few min- 
utes of excitement once a year is not a dur- 
able business model. @ 


— 
Crossing the intersection 


Measuring poverty 


The hunger wanes 


LOS ANGELES 
Fewer Americans are going hungry. 
What went so right? 


44 GINCE WE TOOK Office,” tweeted Presi- 

dent Joe Biden on May 23rd, “hunger 
rates have dropped 43%.” That statistic, al- 
though astonishing, is broadly correct, ac- 
cording to data from the Census Bureau. 
“That's the American Rescue Plan at work,” 
Mr Biden added. The claim of causality, 
however, is less certain. 

Since April 2020 the Household Pulse 
Survey, carried out by the Census Bureau, 
has asked a representative sample of 
American adults whether there was 
enough to eat in their household over the 
previous week. The share who respond ei- 
ther that there is “sometimes” or “often” 
not enough food are classified as living in 
hunger. Over the course of the covid-19 epi- 
demic, this proportion has hovered around 
10%. It peaked just ahead of Christmas at 
13.7%, equivalent to 30m people. Since 
then the figure has fallen steeply (see 
chart). The survey, carried out between 
April 28th and May 1oth, put the figure at 
8.7%, Or18.2m people. 

Although Mr Biden would like to credit 
his American Rescue Plan for this im- 
provement, the claim does not stand up to 
closer inspection. The president signed 
that bill on March uth, yet by March 17th 
the share of people saying that they had 


United States, odds of being infected with covid-19, compared to white people 


By ethnic group, April-December 2020, log scale 


® Allnon-whites @ Black “Asian ®Native* @ Hispanic 

Equal 1.5x a 25x 3x 
No controls ® } ° « 

95% confidence interval ~ 

Education... = ‘ 
..and income td] 1] e 
..and age e ee o 
...and Sex td ee e 
...and underlying health ° .e c 


Sources: A3.Al; Covid-19 Research Database 


Covid racial disparities 


*Native Americans and Pacific islanders 


According to the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, racial minorities were 
three times as likely to be hospitalised with covid-19 as whites. But why? Data scien- 
tists at A3.Al, a health-research group, analysed the insurance records of 14m patients 
in the Covid-19 Research Database, 380,000 of whom were diagnosed with the virus, to 
disentangle the causes for The Economist. Even controlling for education, income, age 
and prior health conditions does not explain what is going on. But one notable finding 
is that Hispanic Americans were the most vulnerable group. 


United States 


== 
Making dough 
United States, hunger rate 


% of adults 

American Rescue 
Plan payments 15 

sent out 


Economic impact 
payments sent out 












A S O° N D 
2020 


Source: Census Bureau 


AM J J 


not eaten properly had already fallen to its 
lowest since covid-19 was diagnosed wide- 
ly in America. It took at least six days for 
the first Rescue Plan cheques, worth $1,400 
for every adult, to be received, suggesting 
that the initial decline in hunger was 
caused by something else. 

There are several possible reasons why 
hunger has fallen. First, the steadily im- 
proving economy. The unemployment rate 
has fallen from its peak of 14.8% in April 
2020 to 6.1%. However, hunger rates did 
not begin to decline until the final days of 
2020; they remained stubbornly high last 
year even as unemployment fell. On a 
state-by-state basis, there appears to De lit- 
tle relationship between the change in un- 
employment and the fall in hunger rates 
over the past year. Another possible expla- 
nation is the reopening of schools, which 
may have given more children access to 
subsidised food. But again, school reopen- 
ings did not begin until well after hunger 
began to trend downwards. 

A third possible cause of the decline in 
hunger is one that Mr Biden may not wish 
to trumpet. An earlier round of stimulus 
cheques worth $600 was delivered in De- 
cember 2020 to every American adult, un- 
der legislation signed by the outgoing 
president, Donald Trump. That bill also in- 
creased food-stamp benefits by 15%. The 
cheques were sent out on December 29th, 
precisely when hunger rates began falling. 

Although the American Rescue Plan 
may not have started the decline in hunger, 
itis likely to play a role in sustaining it. Ex- 
perts say that the vital signs of labour mar- 
kets, such as earnings and unemploy- 
ment—which is still nearly twice its pre- 
pandemic rate—are closely tied to levels of 
hunger. Therefore extraordinary benefits, 
such as the cheques approved by both Mr 
Trump and Mr Biden, have kept hunger 
rates lower than they otherwise would 
have been. The government may hand out 
more money later this year, while the 
American Rescue Plan has extended food 
stamps, too. Both policies are likely to help 
keep hunger at Day. 


27 


28 United States 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Lexington | Who owns the national pastime? 


The takedown of minor league baseball is a revealing blow against localism and tradition 





OTHING SAYS spring like the thwack of cowhide on maple. It 

follows that nothing says mass vaccination like the sound 
echoing through a crowded ballpark. Lexington and 3,000 other 
Marylanders experienced this thrill one sunny evening last week 
in Frederick, Maryland, home of the redoubtable Frederick Keys. 

It was in effect the team’s first home game, the previous day’s 
fixture having been rained off and rarely had the rituals of small- 
town baseball—back after an 18-month, covid-enforced hiatus— 
felt more welcome. Children with cotton candy and mitts raced 
around the concourse. Neighbours and workmates hailed each 
other, relaxed and mostly maskless, as they queued for pizza and 
beers. All rose for the Star-Spangled Banner—whose lyrics are par- 
ticularly prized in Frederick, having been written by a former resi- 
dent, Francis Scott Key, after whom the ball club is named. 

In Section 107, behind home plate, season-ticket holders in- 
dulged in another minor-league tradition: casting a critical eye ov- 
er the new blood. It included the anthem singer (“We've had 
worse—remember the bell ringers?” said Meri-Lyn, an executive 
assistant who rarely misses a game) and the over-enthusiastic 
compere (“She needs to keep off the energy drinks,” deadpanned 
Don, a security-systems expert, between logging each ball into his 
tablet). All the Keys’ white-uniformed players were also new. 

“They don’t look too bad,’ offered Don’s wife, Colleen, as the 
home team battled back froma sleepy start. Its lead-off hitter, a 22- 
year-old Nevadan called Nick Hernandez, was the first to impress 
the diehards, after he smacked a double, then a homer in the sixth. 
“Go Nick, we need you to win this!” 

This ritual reflected the churn of talent that is a feature of pro 
baseball’s lower levels. Since the evolution of the farm system in 
the 1920s, the minors have had little or no control over their 
squads, which their major-league patron recruits, pays and treats 
as feeder-stock. In a normal year, two-thirds of a minor-league 
team may be new, and is liable to be raided by its patron during the 
season. Any minor leaguer good enough to be embraced by the 
fans is almost by definition halfway out the door. The same is true 
for a local ballpark’s announcers and entertainers. Paradoxically, 
this makes one of the most locally rooted institutions in American 
sport—the small-town ball club where local couples court each 


other, entertain their children and advertise their businesses—al- 
so one of the most transient. 

With forbearance on both sides, this has been a fruitful ten- 
sion. Major League Baseball, the game’s monopolistic overseer, 
has suffered the inefficiencies of a diffuse system for its talent- 
pool. Minor-league fans have forgone a deep relationship with 
their teams for the thrill of a prestigious connection to the majors 
and high-quality baseball—often in places, such as Clinton, Iowa, 
or Niles, Ohio, with little else to boast of. But MLB has upset this 
balance. Teams like the Keys are emerging from covid-induced ca- 
lamity—the scrapping of a season and over 40m prospective ticket 
sales—to the most traumatic shake-up of the minors in decades. 

On the expiry of a pre-existing operating agreement late last 
year, MLB cut its roster of minor-league affiliates by 42, hardened 
its grip on the remaining 120, and in the process scrapped several 
historic leagues, such as the Ohio-based International League 
(founded in 1884). Advances in talent-spotting had reduced its 
need for a large reserve. The Keys, for 30 years a farm team of the 
Baltimore Orioles, is among the teams that have lost out. 

This change was also covid-related. When MLB first proposed 
its plans, in late 2019, they met high-level pushback. Over a hun- 
dred House members backed a bipartisan “Save Minor League 
Baseball” task-force. A related Senate resolution united both Re- 
publican senators from Iowa—which stood to lose three minor- 
league teams, including the Clinton LumberKings—with Bernie 
Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, whose states stood to lose one 
each. MLB’s chances of getting its way looked dicey. But the pan- 
demic diverted political attention and the cancellation of the mi- 
nors’ season made it hard for them to get it back. MLB ended up 
getting everything it wanted. 

Its 30 franchisees are not the only beneficiaries. Player salaries 
in the minors have been increased (from a pitifully low base). Tra- 
vel distances have been reduced. To its credit, MLB has meanwhile 
helped most of the teams it dropped to find another league. The 
Keys and its recent opponents, the West Virginia Black Bears, are 
among half a dozen that have formed a new league to showcase 
top college players ahead of the MLB draft in July. It should also be 
said that, while the diehards in Section 107 were livid at being 
junked by the Orioles, few other Keys fans seemed to care. Most 
minor-league watchers, having little connection to the players, 
come along for some baseball-themed fun. “It’s a great place to 
bring the kids, butI couldn’t say who’s playing,’ said Dan, a regular 
attendee, sitting with his brother Leel, a thickly-bearded trucker. 

Nonetheless, MLB has dealt a heavy blow to baseball's regional 
infrastructure and traditions. Four of the affected teams have 
ceased operations—including another in western Maryland, the 
Hagerstown Suns. More will follow. The Keys will play half as ma- 
ny games as before, but even after shedding staff will not halve 
their costs. Of the 202 teams that have played in independent 
leagues over the past 30 years, almost half failed within four years. 


Ina minor key 

This is a gloomy development, and not only for baseball fans. Poli- 
ticians in both parties talk a lot about improving capitalism by 
righting regional imbalances, respecting place and communities, 
restraining monopolistic fat cats and so forth. It can be hard to 
take such talk seriously. It is even harder now, after they failed to 
protect the national pastime, as represented by the Frederick Keys, 
41 other cherished local teams and their fans, against the cost-cut- 
ting of asports monopoly that rakes in well over $10bn a year. & 


‘The Americas 


The Economist June 5th 2021 








Venezuela 


A scofflaw’s offer 


CARACAS 


Nicolas Maduro suggests he might persecute the opposition a little less if 


sanctions on his government are lifted 


a ERE WE ARE. The winners!” boomed 
Nicolas Maduro at a televised cere- 
mony on May 2oth. It was the third anni- 
versary of what the Venezuelan president 
describes as his “popular victory”: an elec- 
tion in 2018 which secured him a second 
presidential term. “The election had such 
an important impact for us,’ agreed his 
wife, Cilia Flores. She was more right than 
she perhaps intended to be. 
For it was that vote, a fraud managed by 
a biased electoral authority, that led doz- 
ens of Western countries to brand Mr Ma- 
duro a dictator and isolate his regime. The 
United States has imposed financial sanc- 
tions on him and most of his political al- 
lies, including Ms Flores. American com- 
panies, once the main buyers of Venezue- 
la’s crude oil, are prohibited from all deal- 
ings with the regime. The American 
government has offered a $15m award for 
information leading to the arrest of Mr Ma- 
duro. Dozens of democracies have, to vary- 
ing degrees, formally declared the head of 
the National Assembly, Juan Guaido, to be 
the rightful leader of the country. The Ven- 


ezuelan economy has continued its relent- 
less collapse, shrinking by more than 70% 
since Mr Maduro took office in 2013. Oil 
production has fallen to levels last seen in 
the 1940s. One-third of the population do 
not have reliable access to sufficient food. 

Yet if it was not a “popular victory’, it 
was one for Mr Maduro. He has neutralised 
the opposition, making a mockery of the 
internationally supported plan to replace 
him with Mr Guaido. The latter’s hope— 
that an underpaid and demoralised army 
would switch sides and put him into pow- 
er—now seems a fantasy. Of the almost 60 
countries which at one stage accepted Mr 
Guaido as president, all but eight have qui- 
etly dropped the designation from their 
communiqués this year. 

Mr Maduro, a former bus driver snob- 
bishly dismissed as a “donkey” by his ene- 
mies, has proved far wilier than they had 
imagined. “He has uncanny situational in- 
telligence,’ says a former official in his 
government. “If there are three people ina 
room and one must die, it won’t be him.” 
The key to his survival has been patronage. 


> Also in this section 


30 Argentine separatists 


“The government is more like a clan now,’ 
says the ex-official. Generals, governors 
and gang leaders rule parts of the country 
like mini-fiefs. With oil money running 
short, the state hands out land and devel- 
opment rights to buy loyalty instead. In Los 
Roques, a Caribbean archipelago, man- 
sions are being built in a national park. In 
the south, a chaotic gold rush has felled 
forests and poisoned rivers. 

Mr Maduro now wants to reduce inter- 
national pressure on his regime. His offi- 
cials speak of a plan to “turn the page”. The 
idea is that by holding slightly less rigged 
regional elections and sending a team to 
negotiate with the opposition, Mr Maduro 
may persuade President Joe Biden’s ad- 
ministration to pare back sanctions im- 
posed by Donald Trump. Mr Maduro 
“wants to figure out a way to give up as lit- 
tle as possible but get some legitimacy’, 
says an Official in the us State Department. 
A significant easing of sanctions is unlike- 
ly. But threats from the United States have 
grown quieter. (Mr Trump publicly mused 
about ousting Mr Maduro by any means 
necessary, including an invasion.) Europe 
has also changed its tune. “The talk these 
days is of regime improvement, not regime 
change,” says a diplomat. 

After denying for years that Venezuela 
faces a humanitarian crisis, Mr Maduro 
agreed in April to allow the UN’s World 
Food Programme into the country to feed 
children. He hosted the wFP’s boss, David 


Beasley (an American) in Caracas, the cap- >> 


30 The Americas 


pital. Eleven days later the government 
transferred six former executives of Citgo, 
an oil-refining firm based in America, 
from prison, where they had been since 
2017, to house arrest. The attorney-general 
vowed to investigate the security services’ 
role in three controversial killings. 

In preparation for regional elections, 
the government and some elements of the 
opposition have agreed to empanel a new 
electoral council (CNE). It is still skewed in 
the regime’s favour, but two of its five 
members are friendly to the opposition 
(previously only one was). 

The announcement has, as intended, 
divided the opposition. Mr Guaido initially 
rejected it as an “imposition of the regime’, 
but others seem keen to take part. Hen- 
rique Capriles, a former presidential can- 
didate who helped negotiate the deal, de- 
scribed it as the “least bad” CNE since Mr 
Maduro’s predecessor and mentor, Hugo 
Chavez, won elections in 1998. The Norwe- 
gian government is sponsoring a parallel 
effort, which may take place in Mexico, to 
get both sides negotiating. 

Public support for Mr Guaido has fallen 
from over 60% in 2019 to around 15%, ac- 
cording to Datanalisis, a polling firm. His 
“mandate” derives from his leadership of 
the National Assembly elected in 2015. Its 
term expired in January. The assembly has 
granted itself a one-year extension, saying 
that no credible elections could be held un- 
der Mr Maduro. But many of the govern- 
ments that publicly support him, and even 
some allies in the assembly, think it would 
be wrong to extend again. 

If talks go ahead, the opposition’s de- 
mands would include the release of politi- 
cal prisoners, perhaps a further overhaul of 
the CNE, an early presidential election (the 
next is scheduled for 2024) and the admis- 
sion of foreign observers for all future 
polls. In return the regime wants the re- 
moval of all sanctions, the release of funds 
frozen by the United States and other 
countries, and the acceptance ofa rival Na- 
tional Assembly created by Mr Maduro. 

The United States has indicated that it 
would contemplate modifications, at least, 
to the sanctions. Mr Guaido has moderated 
his earlier all-or-nothing approach to 
talks, with Mr Maduro stepping down as a 
precondition. Sceptics argue it is all a 
waste of time, and that Mr Maduro, who 
has held four rounds of negotiations with 
the opposition since 2013, has no intention 
of agreeing to anything that might lead to 
his losing power. 

But there exists another view: that the 
president and his wife have their eyes on 
retirement, and would like to hand over to 
a palatable successor before new presiden- 
tial elections in 2024. Mr Maduro, says the 
former government official, “wants to be 
remembered as the man who took on the 
United States and won”. 


Argentina 


Rushing for the 
exit 


MENDOZA 
Covid-ig is inspiring separatism in 
Argentina’s winelands 


N A RECENT Friday evening in Mendo- 
O-a the capital of Argentina’s wine 
country, a group of well-to-do Mendocinos 
held a Zoom session with Luciana Sabina, a 
historian. “Self-rule, it’s a big part of our 
DNA,’ she declared, as she took her viewers 
through earthquakes and economic crises, 
singing the praises of Italian immigrants 
who planted fructuous vineyards in the 
Andes. In her telling, an epidemic was a 
turning-point in the province's history. 
During a cholera outbreak in the 1880s 
Mendoza wanted to close itself off from the 
rest of the country. Argentina’s then dicta- 
tor, General Julio Argentino Roca, forced 
the province to open. “We lost the battle for 
self-rule, thousands of lives too,” Ms Sabi- 
na concluded. 

Once again, a pandemic is driving a 
wedge between Mendoza and Buenos 
Aires. Covid-19 is surging in Argentina; the 
country is recording 35,000 new Cases a 
day. The provincial government has defied 
President Alberto Fernandez by keeping its 
schools open. It has imposed a looser cur- 
few and was against extending Argentina’s 
lockdown beyond May 30th. The tension is 
inspiring demands for autonomy more 
generally. Some political activists even talk 
of independence from Argentina. They call 
it “MendoExit”. 

“The government just takes from us, it’s 
a disgrace,” says Luciano, a farmhand ona 
Small vineyard in the province's Uco valley, 
where Malbec, the soft red wine that 
helped make Mendoza famous, is pro- 


Eager to plough their own furrow 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


duced. “We live by our work, we Mendoci- 
nos provide for ourselves,” remarks Cristi- 
na, a young mother checking French oak 
barrels in a nearby winery. Taxes on ex- 
ports in particular are disliked. “That mon- 
ey, from our labour, should stay in Mendo- 
Za, Says Juan, a winemaker. 

Per person, Mendoza gets the least 
funding from the central government of all 
of Argentina’s 23 provinces. Last spring Jo- 
sé Manuel Ortega, a former investment 
banker and winemaker, paid for an opin- 
ion poll of Mendoza, Cordoba and Santa Fe, 
the country’s richest provinces, which are 
all home to opposition leaders. Two-fifths 
of respondents in Cordoba and a third in 
Mendoza said they would back seceding 
from Argentina. Another poll in April 
showed support rising. “I hate saying it, 
but this is a failing state,” says Mr Ortega. 

One Mendocino legislator, José Luis Ra- 
mon, has proposed a plebiscite on inde- 
pendence when the province votes in mid- 
term elections later this year. A MendoExit 
movement, run by Hugo Laricchia, a pug- 
nacious acupuncturist, has joined forces 
with the established regional Democratic 
party to present a new force in regional 
politics, called Exito. Alfredo Cornejo, a 
former governor of Mendoza and the lead- 
er of Argentina’s Radical party, says that 
“Mendoza has what it needs to live inde- 
pendently.” Mr Cornejo, who has presiden- 
tial aspirations, is not calling for indepen- 
dence himself, but he plays up to it. “Peo- 
ple want out of this Argentina and the way 
it’s run, not the country itself,” he says. 

Whether all this will come to much is 
unclear. The constitution does not allow 
for secession, notes Anabel Sagasti, a sena- 
tor of the ruling Peronist party. But in the 
Uco valley Raul, a worker loading cases of 
Malbec for export, says he would vote for 
Exito. “We can’t go it alone, but with others 
like Cordoba, we could.” His boss laughs at 
the idea. Not everybody will. m 





“= 


a 
y 


_ 
i 


wo ft * 
at 


They’ll never take our kimchi 


SEOUL 


Social-media-fuelled spats over history and culture are growing more intense 


SUPERNATURAL DRAMA about evil spir- 
Ais trying to bring down a medieval dy- 
nasty is not, you might think, to be taken 
too seriously. Yet when “Joseon Exorcist’ 
hit South Korean screens earlier this year, 
it provoked apoplexy on social media. The 
show was historically inaccurate, fumed 
pedants. Not because it showed ancient 
Korean royals battling the undead, but be- 
cause it showed them enjoying Chinese 
Snacks, such as mooncakes and preserved 
eggs. Companies pulled their advertising. 
The show was taken off the air after just 
two episodes. 

The incident is just one ina Series of re- 
cent rows. In the past few months South 
Koreans have repeatedly taken to social 
media to rail against the “excessive” pres- 
ence of Chinese brands on domestic tele- 
vision, forcing actors and broadcasters to 
apologise. They are even more outraged 
when Chinese state media, diplomats and 
social-media users suggest that important 
parts of Korea’s cultural heritage such as 
kimchit (fermented cabbage), samgyetang 
(chicken soup with ginseng) or hanbok (a 


traditional form of dress) are in fact Chi- 
nese. In April nearly 700,000 Koreans 
signed a petition asking the government 
not to “give our land to China” by permit- 
ting a China-themed cultural park and ho- 
tel in the north-eastern province of Gang- 
won. In response, the (Korean) developers 
called off the project. 

These arguments are the latest version 
of an old clash of competing nationalisms. 
South Koreans are painfully aware of their 
country’s history as a tributary to Chinese 
empires, and of how Chinese troops 
slaughtered South Koreans during the Ko- 
rean war to save the despotic regime in the 
North. They are proud of their country’s 
modernity, wealth and democracy. Many 


32 Running India’s far-flung territories 
33 India turns against social media 
33 Indonesia's worrying new internet law 


34 Banyan: Olympic stubbornness 





look down on China as poor, autocratic and 
altogether less sophisticated, while also 
resenting how important its vast markets 
are to South Korea’s own economic suc- 
cess. By contrast, Chinese sometimes view 
South Korea as a haughty minnow that de- 
rives its culture from its bigger neighbour, 
and that must occasionally be put in its 
place. “Koreans believe our culture is un- 
ique and was never dependent on China, 
whereas China thinks Korea only has a cul- 
ture thanks to China,” says Lee Moon-ki of 
Sejong University in Seoul. 

The tensions arising from such differ- 
ent interpretations of history—and the 
thin-skinned reactions to them—have sur- 
faced periodically, ever since the two coun- 
tries established diplomatic relations in 
1992. A Chinese memorial to soldiers who 
died in the Korean war was the source of a 
big row in the 1990s. Ten years later there 
was another noisy quarrel over Chinese re- 
search into an ancient kingdom that once 
straddled what is now the border between 
China and North Korea. South Koreans saw 
it as an effort to reframe the history of their 
peninsula. The two countries appear to be 
Sliding into another prolonged bout of 
mudslinging, this time intensified by so- 
cial media. 

South Koreans blame the bad blood on 
increasingly assertive nationalism in Chi- 
na. Xi Jinping, China’s leader, “keeps talk- 
ing about the Chinese Dream, about redis- 
covering past glories after 100 years of 
pain,’ says Mr Lee. Nationalist rhetoric | 


32 Asia 


>from officials encourages ordinary Chi- 
nese to echo inflammatory claims, such as 
that China invented kimchi, reckons Min 
Kwi-sik of Hanyang University in Seoul. 
The combination of official needling and 
provocations by ordinary people riles Ko- 
reans. “It’s a sense of: they used to take our 
land, now they take our kimchi,’ he says. 
And the viral, engagement-driven mecha- 
nism of social media tends to amplify the 
loudest, angriest voices, even if they be- 
long to only asmall minority. “The internet 
is a great place to spread conflict and bury 
solutions,’ says Mr Min. 

Still, the social-media spats reflect a 
deepening dislike of China. In two separate 
opinion polls conducted this spring, Kore- 
ans were about as favourably inclined to- 
wards China as to North Korea (with which 
they are technically still at war) and only 
barely more so than towards Japan, Korea's 
former colonial oppressor. Opinions of 
China were better as recently as 2019, sug- 
gesting that the pandemic may have col- 
oured views. But the real turning-point, 
says Kim Ji-yoon, an analyst in Seoul who 
Specialises in polling, was an economic 
boycott launched by China in 2017 in re- 
sponse to South Korea’s deployment of an 
American missile-defence system known 
aS THAAD. Shin Gi-wook of Stanford Uni- 
versity agrees: “It was a bit of a rude awak- 
ening, alerting South Korea to the fact that 
China was an aggressive power.” 

Young people take a particularly dim 
view of China, especially when compared 
with other neighbours and America. “I 
know that eating mala soup or going to 
shops run by Chinese-Koreans will benefit 
the Chinese Communist Party eventually,” 
says Kim Woo-jin, a 25-year-old from 
Seoul. Ms Kim, the polling analyst, is not 
Surprised. Young people “don’t know as 
much about China as about, say, America, 
so they make fewer distinctions between 
the country, the people and the govern- 
ment,’ she says. 

The discontent is, for now, limited to 
the low-stakes cultural realms of food and 
television. Popular views of China have lit- 
tle bearing on the South Korean govern- 
ment’s carefully calibrated diplomacy, 
casting China as an important strategic 
partner while stressing the centrality of the 
security alliance with America. Even Chi- 
nese officials have made the occasional 
conciliatory noise about the origins of kim- 
chi. Chinese shop-owners and restaura- 
teurs in Seoul report no signs of a boycott 
like the one that hit Japanese brands and 
noodle joints during a spat two years ago. 

However, during a meeting with Presi- 
dent Joe Biden in Washington on May 21st, 
Moon Jae-in, South Korea’s president, was 
unusually explicit in his commitment to 
an American agenda aimed at containing 
Chinese influence. It is in everyone's inter- 
est to keep the kimchi wars cold. 


India’s far-flung territories 


Run the jewels 


DELHI 
India plans to remake Lakshadweep, 
whether locals want to or not 


HE BROCHURE wiites itself: a scattering 
Tor coral ringlets, each encircling its 
own turquoise lagoon within the Arabian 
Sea, Lakshadweep is India at its most allur- 
ing. These 36 islands, together totalling 
just 32 square kilometres of land, are peo- 
pled by a matrilineal, mostly Muslim soci- 
ety where families make their living 
through seafaring and coconut harvests. 

In the past fortnight this drop in the In- 
dian bucket, just 70,000 people among 
1.4bn, has come to exemplify a sort of con- 
troversy that is becoming incessant. The 
national government of Narendra Modi 
and his Hindu-first Bharatiya Janata Party 
(BJP) is flexing little-tested executive mus- 
cles to push through a package of reforms 
for the far-off islands. They would open up 
the archipelago to development, of tou- 
rism in particular. Locals are dismayed. 

In theory “union territories” such as 
Lakshadweep are protected from some of 
the vagaries of electoral politics, since they 
are not part of any state. But that leaves the 
central government with sweeping power 
over them, which it increasingly employs, 
as Delhi and Jammu & Kashmir have lately 
discovered. Lakshadweep has an adminis- 
trator—in effect, picked by the prime min- 
ister—who may rule without regard for lo- 
cal opinion. These days, that is just what he 
is doing. 

Before the latest administrator, Praful 
K. Patel, arrived in December, the job had 
been held by career bureaucrats. Mr Patel is 





Dweep blue 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


a politician, a BJP man from Mr Modi's 
home state, Gujarat, where he was home 
minister. AS administrator of Daman, a 
former Portuguese enclave north of Mum- 
bai, he enraged tribal fishermen by demol- 
ishing 90 homes along a stretch of beach 
seized for development. Lakshadweep is 
even riper for such schemes. 

Earlier this year Mr Patel published a 
Slew of far-reaching draft laws that would 
give the administrator the right to acquire 
any land for “a public purpose”. Other 
changes are striking given that 97% of the 
people of Lakshadweep are Muslim. Mr Pa- 
tel would ban the sale of beef and expand 
liquor permits, the better to attract tourists 
from the rest of India. A Prevention of Anti- 
Social Activities Act, modelled after a sim1i- 
lar law in Gujarat, would allow locals to be 
jailed without a hearing for up to a year— 
Supposedly necessary because smugglers 
have been caught in Lakshadweep’s waters. 
Sundry rules would displace a traditional 
port, replace local dairy with imports 
(from Gujarat) and disqualify politicians 
with more than two children from contest- 
ing local elections. 

Some of the proposed changes are wor- 
thy of debate. Many in Lakshadweep are in- 
terested in fostering tourism. Few, how- 
ever, seem to like Mr Patel’s plans to do so. 
Lakshadweep’s sole member of parlia- 
ment, Mohammed Faizal, says that the 
most incendiary proposals, concerning li- 
quor and beef, are diversions. Seizing land 
is the power the government really intends 
to exercise, he reckons. 

On mainland India, the debate about 
Lakshadweep has tended to skirt the ques- 
tion of locals’ wishes. A spokeswoman for 
the BJP explained how, “with proper plan- 
ning, Lakshadweep can thrive and become 
the jewel in India’s crown!” This is odd lan- 
guage to hear 74 years after India extricated 
itself from another country’s crown. @ 





The Economist June 5th 2021 


Regulating online content (1) 


Shooting the 
messenger 


India’s ruling party turns against 
social media 


ITH HIS 68.7m Twitter followers Na- 
V V rendra Modi, India’s prime minister, 
nestles comfortably between the American 
celebrities Selena Gomez and Kim Kar- 
dashian in rankings of popularity on the 
service. This is not by accident. Mr Modi 
and his Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) have 
been early and avid exploiters of social me- 
dia. Whether to lure new members to join 
the 180m who already make it the world’s 
biggest political party, to hustle donations 
or amplify attacks on its critics, the ByP has 
relied on internet platforms to reshape In- 
dia’s politics. 

But with Mr Mod's popularity tumbling 
in recent months, his government is turn- 
ing against these useful messengers. At the 
end of May it began enforcing new rules 
that, among other things, make internet- 
based conduits of information, such as 
Twitter and Facebook, legally liable for any 
content that they carry, oblige them to re- 
spond promptly to official demands to 
block sites the government deems bad, and 
will force messaging services, such as 
WhatsApp, Signal and Telegram, to break 
the encryption that guarantees privacy to 
their users. The rules also extend govern- 
ment oversight of digital news platforms 
and streaming services, such as Netflix. 

A first shot across the bows came on 
May 24th, when police arrived in force at 
Twitter's offices in Delhi and Gurgaon, a 
satellite city, to serve a legal notice regard- 
ing the firm’s decision to mark some posts 
as “manipulated media’—part of Twitter’s 
global efforts to identify blatant misinfor- 
mation. The labels were added in response 
to investigations that showed Bjp officials 
to be the source of tweets about a so-called 
media “toolkit” laying out how to attack 
the government’s handling of the pandem- 
ic. The offending tweets alleged that the 
“toolkit” (which was later exposed as fake) 
had been created by the rival Congress par- 
ty. But rather than investigate the political 
Smear campaign, the government de- 
manded that Twitter remove its tags. 

Twitter's response, proclaiming its 
commitment to free speech within ethical 
bounds, and expressing concern for the 
safety of its employees, seems to have en- 
raged the government further. The minis- 
try of information technology accused the 
American firm of attempting to “dictate 
terms to the world’s largest democracy”. It 
Said that Twitter routinely turned a blind 
eye to content hostile to India, such as use 


of the term “Indian variant” to describe a 
nasty mutation of the coronavirus. The 
onus to protect Indians’ freedoms lies with 
their elected government, not foreign tech 
firms, thundered Bhupender Yadav, a top 
BJP Official, in an opinion column. 

Mr Yadav has a point. No country has 
yet satisfactorily answered the question of 
how to regulate online content. It makes 
sense, ata minimum, for big multination- 
als to face some degree of local scrutiny 
and accountability. Yet India’s tangle of 
laws and slow and capricious courts make 
the task of moderation infinitely compli- 
cated. In the absence of universal rules and 
standards, or of handing Chinese-style 
censorship powers to a single agency, it 
must rely largely on trust. 

The trouble is that while India’s new 
rules make it clear that the government no 
longer trusts internet firms to police them- 
selves, its own behaviour brings into ques- 
tion whether ordinary Indian citizens can 
trust their government to protect their 
freedoms. With dismaying frequency Mr 
Modi’s men have used the institutions they 
control to target and punish not people 
who represent any clear threat to India, but 
rather the Byp’s own critics and opponents. 

Companies affected by the new rules 
are trying various tactics. Google is seeking 
exemption on grounds that it acts more 
like a utility than a content manager. Twit- 
ter has partly complied, by appointing an 
interim “grievance officer” to address com- 
plaints. Other firms, including WhatsApp, 
have sent in the lawyers: at least seven law- 
suits are currently being heard in Indian 
courts. But don't hold your breath. Judges 
know that those who give rulings favour- 
able to Mr Modi seem mysteriously to be 
rewarded with plump post-retirement si- 
necures. The internet is a marvel, but older 
ways of communicating still work, too. & 


Regulating online content (2) 


Prohibited 
material 


SINGAPORE 
A new internet law in Indonesia sets a 
wottrying example 


FTER A SLOW Start, citizens of South- 

East Asian countries have in recent 
years taken to the internet with gusto, us- 
ing it, like their counterparts everywhere 
else, to shop, to chat with their friends, to 
watch movies and to listen to music—and 
to criticise their governments. And as in 
many parts of the world, governments 
have found that they do not much like that 
last feature of this whole internet thing. 

In response, many simply charge trou- 
blesome individuals using laws against 


Asia 





Jokowi is watching 


age-old offences like treason, blasphemy 
and sedition. More thorough legislatures, 
such as Singapore's, have passed new laws 
prohibiting “fake news”. Some govern- 
ments are even more heavy-handed. 
Myanmar has lately been choking off ac- 
cess to the internet. Cambodia plans to set 
up a government-controlled “gateway” 
through which all internet traffic must 
pass, the better to inspect it for wrong- 
think. They are in the vanguard. Asian 
countries are “leading the way on digital 
censorship”, says Linda Lakhdhir of Hu- 
man Rights Watch, a pressure group. 

As South-East Asia’s most robust de- 
mocracy, Indonesia might have been ex- 
pected to buck this trend. But under Presi- 
dent Joko Widodo, known as Jokowi, who 
has been in power since 2014, many senior 
officials have succumbed to what Ben 
Bland, the president’s biographer, calls 
“knee-jerk authoritarianism”. A law passed 
in 2008, ostensibly to protect digital con- 
sumers, is commonly used to silence crit- 
ics of the government. In 2019 authorities 
throttled the internet in Jakarta in re- 
sponse to riots ginned up by a defeated 
presidential candidate, and in Papua, a re- 
gion racked by separatism, when violent 
protests broke out there. The government 
is also fond of trying to scrub the internet 
clean of content it dislikes. The communi- 
cations ministry frequently orders inter- 
net service providers to block websites it 
deems false or indecent. 

The latest weapon in Indonesia’s 
Speech-suppressing arsenal is Ministerial 
Regulation no. 5 (MRS), a new decree that 
requires internet platforms to remove pro- 
hibited content, defined as anything that 
violates Indonesian law, incites unrest or 
disturbs public order, within as little as 
four hours. The government says it is in- 


33 


tended to “preserve and protect the coun- >> 


34 Asia 


» try’. Many suspect it is designed chiefly to 
preserve and protect the government. 

The law requires “private-sector elec- 
tronic-service operators’, such as social- 
media platforms, search engines and fi- 
nancial, cloud-computing and data-pro- 
cessing services, to register with the gov- 
ernment and to provide sensitive informa- 
tion. When the communications ministry 
issues a take-down notice, firms must 
comply within 24 hours—or four hours in 
the case of child pornography, material 
promoting terrorism or “content which 
disturbs society”. Penalties for firms which 


fail to comply include large fines and hav- 
ing their services blocked. 

Critics say the law is vague and poorly 
worded, making it ripe for misuse. Online 
journalism websites, for example, could 
count as “private-sector electronic-system 
operators”. “Prohibited content” could in- 
clude anything that would provide access 
to such content. Merely using a virtual 
private network—to log into an secure 
work network, for example—might be- 
come illegal. 

Another concern is the requirement 
that companies provide law-enforcement 


Minus the shooting 


Japan’s choice to persevere with the Olympic games is underpinned by nationalism 


EWER THAN 50 days remain before the 
E apparently unstoppable opening of 
the 2020 summer Olympic games in 
Tokyo. The pandemic led to their post- 
ponement last year. Today the clock is 
ticking down against a backdrop of re- 
surgent infections of covid-19 in Japan, a 
state of emergency in Tokyo and nine 
other prefectures, hospitals filling up 
and widespread opposition to the games 
from the public, businessfolk and med- 
ical experts. 

All this counts for little in the eyes of 
the government and the International 
Olympic Committee (10c). The games are 
a go “barring Armageddon’, as one IOC 
member unhelpfully put it. Yet Armaged- 
don is the real fear. The pace of vaccina- 
tion in Japan has been snail-slow. Many 
foreign athletes will arrive unjabbed. The 
games risk going down in history asa 
massive superspreader event. 

One reason for Japan’s obduracy lies 
in its contractual obligations to the Ioc. 
Another is the personal concern of the 
prime minister, Suga Yoshihide, not to 
lose face—and possibly support within 
the ruling party. But the establishment's 
sense of the Olympic games as servinga 
patriotic purpose should not be un- 
derestimated. Tokyo’s Olympics were 
intended to banish a sense of being 
overtaken—“Japan passing’, in the angli- 
cised phrase—by a rising China and 
others following years of stagnation and 
the Fukushima nuclear disaster. Bad 
enough was 2020 passing. The games’ 
total abandonment, in the herd thinking 
of the establishment, does not countasa 
blow for common sense. Rather, it could 
Shatter the very notion that, as Mr Suga’s 
predecessor put it, “Japan is back.” 

The country has been somewhere 
near here before. In the 1930s Japan lob- 
bied hard to host the 1940 Olympic 


games in Tokyo. It was to be Japan’s mo- 
ment to establish itself as a first-rate 
power. But like the pandemic today, war— 
Japan’s own invasion of China 1n 1937 and 
a looming global conflict—overshadowed 
everything. The games were cancelled. 

Japan’s military adventurism contrib- 
uted to the cancellation. Yet seeking to put 
a gloss on things, Kido Koichi, an adviser 
to Emperor Hirohito, declared that when 
peace reigned again, Tokyo would be ready 
to host the games and show the people of 
the world “the true Japanese spirit”. After 
the war, Kido was condemned as a war 
criminal, but Tokyo was true to his word. 
In 1964 it put ona splendid games, which 
Served as a modern, democratic coming- 
out party for Japan. 

Ever since, Asia's hostings of the sum- 
mer games have carried a broader signif- 
icance for the host nation and even its 
neighbours. The 1988 games in Seoul, the 
South Korean capital, were a catalyst for 
democracy, helping to end decades of 
authoritarian rule. China’s communist 
leaders represented the Beijing games in 
2008 as areturn to historical greatness. In 





The Economist June 5th 2021 


agencies with “direct access” to their sys- 
tems and data. What precisely that means 
is unclear, but it would expose platforms to 
all sorts of legal and business risks, accord- 
ing to the Asia Internet Coalition, which 
represents big international tech compa- 
nies. It would also raise serious privacy 
concerns. The government insists that it 
respects the right to privacy and freedom 
of expression. Indeed it has postponed by 
six months the original deadline of June 
2nd for companies to register. Citizens, 
firms and its less democratic neighbours 
will be watching to see which way it goes. 






MM 
2022 Beijing hosts the winter Olympics, 
as the Japanese government is all too 
aware. As Jeff Kingston of Temple Uni- 
versity in Tokyo points out, not holding 
the games would hand a propaganda 
coup to China. 

Yet such grand narratives, coupled 
with the region's brittle nationalisms, 
can rub up against each other. Some 
South Koreans, led by two former prime 
ministers, are calling for their country to 
boycott the Tokyo games. At issue isa 
speck that appears on the official online 
map of Japan’s Olympic torch relay. It 
represents the rocky islets of Dokdo, 
controlled by South Korea but claimed by 
Japan, which calls them Takeshima. This 
week South Korea “strongly” urged Japan 
to amend the map. 

Japan’s Olympic organisers appear to 
have tweaked the Dokdo dot to make it 
harder to spot. You now have to zoom in 
to see it. It has also been shaded, im- 
plying territorial ambiguity. 

Yet regardless of how the dot got onto 
the Olympic map, or of the modifications 
made to it, Alexis Dudden of the Univer- 
sity of Connecticut argues that it serves 
as “the ultimate dog whistle” to revanch- 
ist Japanese, many in the ruling Liberal 
Democratic Party, who think that noth- 
ing their country did during its militarist 
phase, including the occupation of Ko- 
rea, Warrants an apology. Whoever put in 
the dot knew it would get a rise out of 
easy-to-offend South Koreans. Again, Ms 
Dudden concludes, Japan’s far right 
shores up an unhealthy form of Japanese 
nationalism that is of no help in improv- 
ing the rocky relationship between the 
two countries. And that is to say nothing 
about the want of sportsmanship in 
Japan’s riling its neighbour. But then 
nobody ever said the games are only 
about sport. 


A third 1s the word 


BEIJING 


he 3. 


ai b tl TTT | 


—_— ——_ 


As 


—— a ene eae: 


1%) ieee | = 
_ -————— 


m | 


| 





China has gone from a one-child to a three-child policy in less than six years 


OR A GENERATION, China’s government 

had ordained that “one child is enough” 
for married couples. Then, in 2016, it al- 
lowed them to have a second. On May 31st 
the ruling Politburo declared that a further 
relaxation of birth-control regulations 
would help China to achieve its goal of 
“coping” with a rapidly ageing popula- 
tion—a pressing task. It called for a three- 
child policy. Some parents will respond 
with glee, but most will shrug. 

The government’s previous fears of gal- 
loping population growth now seem 
quaint. At 1.3, China’s fertility rate (the 
number of children an average woman is 
likely to have during her lifetime) is among 
the lowest in the world. Data from the lat- 
est decennial census, released on May uth, 
showed that only 12m babies were born last 
year, adrop of almost 20% from 2019. It was 
China’s lowest population growth since 
the 1960s, when the country was reeling 
from a famine. The population now looks 
likely to peak in the next few years—almost 


a decade sooner than experts at the Chi- 
nese Academy of Social Sciences had, until 
recently, predicted. 

No indication was given of when the 
three-child policy will take effect. But it 
will not end young people’s growing dis- 
dain for baby-making. Reactions online— 
which on many topics tend to side with the 
Communist Party—brimmed with scepti- 
cism. “Do they not yet know that most 
young people are exhausted just support- 
ing themselves?” said one netizen on Wei- 
bo, a Twitter-like site. “This policy is totally 
out of touch with the people,’ wrote anoth- 
er. An online poll by Xinhua, a state news 
agency, asked whether people would con- 
sider having three children. Just 5% of re- 
spondents said they would. Most others 


36 Tibet’s newrailline 


v4 


Said it was “out of the question”. At least 
31,000 took part in the survey before it was 
hastily taken down. Netizens gave a new 
twist toa common idiom, minbuliaosheng, 
which means “people have no means of 
livelihood”. They used it to suggest that 
couples “cannot even speak of giving birth” 
(the characters are the same). 

For parents who do wish to have a third 
child, the change of policy will be a relief. 
Illicit births can incur a large fine or, in the 
case of civil servants, result in dismissal. 
Some women are put under pressure—ille- 
gally—by zealous local officials to undergo 
abortions if giving birth would cause a 
quota to be exceeded. With the three-child 
policy, the government is sending a signal 
that it is “moving very decisively to a pro- 
fertility policy”, says James Liang of Peking 
University. Mr Liang predicts that limits 
will “very soon” be scrapped altogether. 

That would be a huge blessing for those 
who crave large families. But any impact 
on the overall birth rate is unlikely to bea 
lasting one. When China loosened its one- 
child policy, it hoped for a baby boom. 
After a brief initial uptick, however, births 
drifted downwards again. The fertility rate 
edged up slightly (see chart on next page). 
Mr Liang estimates that the three-child 
policy could boost the fertility rate to about 
1.4, still well below the level of 2.1 which 1s 
required for a population to replace itself. 

Encouraged by decades of indoctrina- | 


36 China 


» tion, Chinese parents often feel—in cities 
as well as in villages—that a family’s re- 
sources are best devoted to one child. The 
high cost of housing and education, the 
burden of caring for elderly parents, as 
well as crushingly long work hours also de- 
ter young couples from having more ba- 
bies, or from reproducing at all. As more 
women pursue careers, many are delaying 
marriage and motherhood. 

The Politburo said it would provide bet- 
ter child-care facilities, improve state- 
funded provisions for looking after the el- 
derly, expand maternity benefits and lower 
the cost of education. It also promised to 
“protect the rights of women in employ- 
ment”. It has been doing a poor job of it. In 
2019 the government vowed to make more 
firms comply with existing anti-discrimi- 
nation laws. These ban employers from 
asking women about their child-rearing 
plans in job interviews and from stating a 
preference for male applicants when re- 
cruiting. Offenders can be fined up to 
50,000 yuan ($7,800). In practice, they are 
rarely punished. In a survey released in 
November by Boss Zhipin, a recruitment 
website, more than one in three women 
Said that managers had immediately be- 
gun looking for someone to replace them 
permanently after learning they were preg- 
nant. Some firms illegally force female re- 
cruits to sign contracts promising not to 
have children for several years. 

An image circulated by Xinhua of a 
poster promoting the three-child policy 
features two girls and a boy, probably to 
suggest that girls are good: a cultural pref- 
erence for boys has encouraged sex-selec- 
tive abortions and contributed to a highly 
unbalanced sex ratio. But some female net- 
izens have noticed an irony. Lu Pin, a femi- 
nist who has been living in America since 
the arrest of fellow campaigners in 2015, 
wrote that by promoting larger families, 
the state was, in effect, trying to “exploit 
the unpaid labour of women”. The govern- 
ment has made no effort to encourage men 





= 

Go on, have another 

China 

Fertility rate Population, bn 

6 Ponerchid 1.50 

policy | 
5 | introduced —_ 1.25 
Two-child 

4 policy 1.00 
! introduced 

3 0.75 

2 0.50 

1 0.25 

0 | | () 


1970 80 90 2000 10 #20 


Sources: China Census; United Nations 


to spend more time with their children. 

The Communist Party is in denial. It 
does not admit that its coercive efforts 
have been misguided since the one-child 
policy was launched in 1979. Most of the 
fall in the fertility rate has been caused by 
urbanisation, education and the greater 
participation of women in the workforce. 
The same factors have caused similar de- 
clines in other countries with no brutally 
enforced birth quotas. 

The party may not want to abolish caps 
immediately. To do so would be to ac- 
knowledge error. It would also make re- 
dundant many of the hundreds of thou- 
sands of people who work for the fertility- 
control apparatus. And maintaining a limit 
could help the party to justify some of its 
abuses in the far-western region of Xin- 
Jiang. Ethnic minorities there, most of 
whose members are Muslim, once had 
higher birth quotas. In 2017 the govern- 
ment began a campaign of forced abor- 
tions and sterilisations among Uyghurs, 
even targeting women within their quota. 
Birth rates in Xinjiang plunged. The party 
fears a surge of births of people whom it re- 
gards as potential troublemakers. @ 


Infrastructure in Tibet 


Fast track to the 
throne 


Tibet will soon get a new railway line. 
Tourists will love it; India won’t 


S BIRTHDAY PRESENTS gO, a 435km rail- 

way line that is expected to open this 
month in Tibet will be among the most lav- 
ish. To seekers of high-altitude thrills, it is 
one that will be cherished. The 37bn-yuan 
($5.7bn) track extends from the region’s 
capital Lhasa eastward to the city of Nying- 
chi, which is Tibetan for “Throne of the 
Sun”. It is the region’s first electrified rail- 
way; its trains will be Tibet’s fastest. Offi- 
cials call it a gift for the Communist Party’s 
100th birthday, which will be officially cel- 
ebrated on July 1st (see Chaguan). 

But the new line is only part of what 
China calls the “project of the century”. 
This involves building Tibet’s second rail 
link with China’s interior at a total cost that 
State media say could be about ten times 
that of the Lhasa-Nyingchi stretch, with 
even greater engineering challenges yet to 
come. The section about to open was no 
pushover. Tunnels comprise nearly half of 
its length. Workers had to brave landslides, 
poisonous gas from broken rock, intense 
cold as well as an oxygen-starved atmo- 
sphere at more than 5,000 metres above 
sea level—roughly the altitude of Mount 
Everest’s base camps. When completed in 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


2030, the railway will connect Lhasa with 
Chengdu, the capital of neighbouring Si- 
chuan province. At a maximum speed of 
160kph, the journey will take just 12 hours, 
a third of the time now required by road. 

To the party, it appears no expense is 
too great in its campaign to integrate the 
vast, isolated region more closely with the 
interior. The first rail link, which opened 
in 2006, was also an engineering feat. Long 
lengths of that line from Qinghai province 
had to be laid over permafrost, using high- 
tech means to prevent temperature fluctu- 
ations from damaging the track. 

The most obvious impact has been on 
tourism. In 2005 Tibet received fewer than 
2m visits by tourists. By 2018 the number 
had soared to 33m trips (only 0.7% of them 
by foreigners). The government is aiming 
for 61m by 2025—about 17 times the num- 
ber of Tibet’s inhabitants. Some Tibetans 
worry their culture is being swamped. An 
influx of Han Chinese migrants, including 
shopkeepers and others cashing in on the 
tourism boom, may have fuelled ethnic 
tensions that caused an explosion of un- 
rest in Lhasa and elsewhere across the Ti- 
bet plateau in 2008. Since then the govern- 
ment has clamped down even harder on 
dissent in the region. 

Strategic thinkers in India worry, too. 
The new railway runs close to the Indian 
state of Arunachal Pradesh, which Chinese 
officials sometimes refer to as “south Ti- 
bet” and claim as Chinese territory. China’s 
army swept into it during a brief but 
bloody border war in 1962, before pulling 
back again. India is annoyed enough by 
China’s other big infrastructure project in 
the area: the damming of the Yarlung 
Tsangpo river (as it calls the upper reaches 
of the Brahmaputra), which the new rail- 
way crosses 16 times. It accuses China of 
threatening India’s water security. There is 
little India can do. China is telling it “you 
are not in my league,” says Ashok Swain of 
Uppsala University. The trains will keep on 
running regardless of any complaints. 


400 k 
Gansu — 


Xinjiang 





Sete ery JUNE ae 


Pobre 


Brahmaputra, = 4 
| N DI A Arunachal 


Pradesh Guizhou 


Yunnan 


Tibet railways 
| == Existing 
‘*«» Not yet opened 
‘«» Under construction 


a 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


China 


Chaguan| A century-old party woos the young 


A new children’s film about Zhou Enlai reveals a lot about Xi Jinping’s China 





OUNTRIES HAVE to make revealing choices as they craft patriot- 
C ic messages for children. To put it kindly, young minds are tiny 
treasure-houses that deserve to be stocked with only a nation’s 
most precious beliefs. To be more blunt, small children are easily 
distracted, so are best taught only a few important things. 

It is therefore worth studying what China’s propaganda chiefs 
have in store for youngsters this summer. As usual, June ist was 
marked this year in China as International Children’s Day, a festi- 
val of visits to museums, school picnics and wholesome games. A 
month later there will be a much larger event: celebrations on July 
ist of the 100th anniversary of the party’s founding in 1921. 

China's leader, President Xi Jinping, is presented to the young 
as “Xi Dada’, or “Uncle Xi”, an austere but caring patriarch. Mr Xi 
stresses the importance of loyalty, which is why children’s choirs 
are busy performing such songs as “Me and My Country” and “Fol- 
low the Leadership of the Communist Party of China”. Party histo- 
ry is being used to inspire the masses. That explains reports of 
kindergarten pupils being dressed up in miniature combat fa- 
tigues and told to crawl on their bellies while clutching straw- 
wrapped “rations”, to re-enact Red Army supply runs. There is 
much talk of China entering a “new era” of prosperity, national 
strength and global influence. It is not hard, as a result, to find 
children’s drawings on public display, showing high-speed trains 
and space rockets adorned with Chinese flags. The young are 
urged to be proud of ancient glories too, as heirs to what they are 
told is the oldest continuous civilisation on Earth. 

This year’s Children’s Day saw the release of a new patriotic 
film made especially for children. It depicts the pre-teenage life of 
Zhou Enlai, who was China’s prime minister from 1949 until his 
death from cancer in 1976. This brilliant, disappointing man isa 
puzzle for historians. To this day, many Chinese revere Zhou as a 
moderate who tempered Mao’s worst excesses, especially during 
the Cultural Revolution of 1966-76. Too often, alas, the record 
shows Zhou enabling Mao’s follies and failing to defend close al- 
lies from political attack. Born in 1898 into a once-grand family of 
scholar-officials, Zhou was a precocious student of the classics. 
But his childhood was blighted by the deaths of his mother and 
adoptive mother and by money woes that, at the age of 12, forced 


him to leave his birthplace, Huai’an, in the plains between the Yel- 
low and Yangzi rivers, to seek a new life with an uncle in the north. 

During the first decades of Communist rule, his privileged 
class background had to be explained away. A biography published 
in1977, The Early Life of Zhou Enlai” by Hu Hua, depicts Zhou asa 
“rebel against feudal society”, who as a boy came to hate the gentry 
class into which he was born. Deepening poverty turned him into 
a “great proletarian revolutionary’, it relates. That official history 
manages to praise Zhou’s traditional education while reflecting 
the party’s then-noisy disdain for pre-Communist codes of ethics, 
such as those taught by Confucius. Describing Zhou poring over 
books from his grandfather’s library, Hu asserts that the boy was 
stirred by histories of “laudable national heroes” fighting foreign 
invaders, but was uninterested in Confucianism. 

Biographies written in the 1990s by historians in the West, in- 
cluding Chae-Jin Lee, Barbara Barnouin and Yu Changgen, take a 
different view. They find that Zhou had a conventional Confucian 
education, which marked him for life. Nor do they agree that he 
was an angry rebel, noting his later, loving praise for his two moth- 
ers. Both were educated, tradition-minded daughters of scholar- 
officials. Indeed, they link Zhou’s survival at Mao’s side to a rever- 
ence for Confucian teachings about self-restraint and the need for 
officials to swallow small insults in the national interest. 

The new film appears to agree. Chaguan watched “Zhou Enlai 
in his Childhood” on Children’s Day in a cinema in Huai’an. The 
movie does not hide Zhou’s ancestral wealth. It portrays him asa 
solemn little boy ina silk gown, visiting relatives in antique-filled 
mansions. Confucian customs are shown as expressions of love. 
The young Zhou kowtows to his elders and studies cobwebbed 
texts to make his dying mother proud. His adoptive mother teach- 
es him to swallow an unjust punishment with tales of an ancient 
general who endured humiliations on his way to greatness. 

The film is not fast-paced. There is much fidgeting in the cine- 
ma, though children perk up at a brief shot of a boy’s bare bottom, 
and again when Zhou urges his adoptive mother to drink ink asa 
medicine. The Zhou family’s struggles to afford a middle-class life 
are crafted to resonate with older cinema-goers. Zhou’s father, a 
petty official in another town, is depicted as a migrant worker— 
largely absent, always fretting about money, and emotionally dis- 
tant from his own son. The film shows health crises that wreck 
family finances and trigger rows about whether to spend money 
on medicine or school fees. Such dilemmas remain common to- 
day. The film’s ending unites all ages. Over swelling chords, young 
Zhou waxes indignant on learning that Russia and Japan have tak- 
en territory from the ailing Chinese empire, then declares that he 
studies hard so that China may rise. That phrase of Zhou’s is taught 
in schools to this day, and triggers murmurs of recognition. 


Nationalism instead of class struggle 

After the film, a mother in the audience, Lu Ye, calls it “very educa- 
tional” to see the orphaned Zhou confront debt-collectors, endure 
hardships and assume responsibilities beyond his years. Ms Lu’s 
12-year-old son, Rongye, says that he “really liked” the film. He 
praises an episode in which Zhou picked and sold wild vegetables 
to help repay those debts, until his hands bled. “For the welfare of 
the family, he didn't care,” Rongye notes approvingly. 

The film-makers say that their aim is to promote education and 
family harmony. China is a deeply conservative place, even as it 
prepares to celebrate its revolutionary past. Chinese children, told 
constantly to be diligent and obedient, sensed that all along. @ 


38 


Defending the realm 


ASE 0 F CALAMITY, | 


Sonat 


GLASS © 


























The British state embraces a new era of drills, stockpiles and imagining the worst 


HE BRITISH government thought its 
‘A pecans for a pandemic to be 
among the best in the world. In 2016, 950 
officials drilled for an outbreak of “swan 
flu”, a hypothetical illness which killed 
400,000 people. It gave ministers some 
useful pointers on enlisting retired doc- 
tors and drafting emergency legislation. 

Yet the planners did not prepare for a vi- 
rus that could spread asymptomatically. 
Since they did not imagine a national lock- 
down, no plans fora furlough scheme were 
drafted. The permanent secretary at the 
business department was not even aware 
the exercise had taken place. The planners 
fretted about how the public would react to 
mass burials and soldiers on the streets. 
The resulting report stayed secret. Domin- 
ic Cummings, Boris Johnson’s former aide, 
told MPs last month that when a pandemic 
actually struck, Whitehall froze. 

Mr Johnson now wants to build a more 
muscular state, which intervenes in the 
market, and tells judges and museum cura- 
tors what’s what. He wants it to be harder, 
too: less permeable to hostile states and 


readier for emergencies. Successive gov- 
ernments have trimmed fat from public 
Services, and chased foreign investment. 
Mr Johnson is twisting the dials back, from 
openness to guardedness, and from effi- 
ciency to resilience. Defence of the realm is 
the spirit of the age (see chart on the next 
page). Think-tanks that churned out pa- 
pers on slimming the state under David 
Cameron, prime minister from 2010 to 
2016, now bristle with ideas for how to 
toughen it up. 


39 Turf wars 


40 Bagehot: Parallel societies 


Read more from this week’s Britain section: 
Economist.com/Britain 


if re 





Covid-19 1s one factor; concerns over 
China another. Brexit has shaken old cer- 
tainties. Ministers are spooked by French 
sabre-rattling over electricity supplies in 
fishing negotiations. “For a long time we 
thought it was the ‘end of history’,” says 
Alan Mendoza of the Henry Jackson Soci- 
ety, asecurity-policy think-tank attuned to 
the government’s thinking. “We didn't re- 
alise the system was being challenged on 
such a dramatic scale by others.” 

Risk will be weighed differently. Since 
its creation in 2001, the Civil Contingen- 
cies Secretariat, Britain’s emergency-plan- 
ning unit, has focused on likely emergen- 
cies, such as terrorist attacks and flooding. 
In future, it will prepare more for the im- 
probable yet catastrophic, such as nuclear 
accidents, and crises unfolding simulta- 
neously. Ministers plan a whizzy “situa- 
tion centre”, bristling with data feeds. 

Health policy will look more like coun- 
ter-terrorism. England’s sluggish public- 
health agency has been broken up and re- 
placed by a new body focused on epidem- 
ics and other emergencies. The new Joint 
Biosecurity Centre, which scans for out- 
breaks, has been built by securocrats and is 
modelled on Britain’s terrorism-analysis 
centre. The government wants PPE to be 
made in Britain, breaking its reliance on 
China. A new state vaccine factory is due to 
open in the autumn. 

Britons, it turned out, didn’t panic, and 
will be expected to continue to do their bit. 
The “integrated review” of Britain’s de-} 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


» fence and foreign policy published in 
March advocated a Scandinavian-style 
“whole-of-society” posture. Penny Mor- 
daunt, a minister responsible for civil con- 
tingencies and co-author of “Greater: Brit- 
ain after the storm”, wants the state to har- 
ness those who volunteered to battle coro- 
navirus, directing them towards “national 
missions”, such as elderly care. Ministers 
plan to overhaul military reserves, and 
create a new cadre of civilian reservists, 
such as retired doctors and civil servants, 
who can be mobilised in crises. It is a radi- 
cal shift, says Elisabeth Braw of the Ameri- 
can Enterprise Institute, a think-tank, 
from the prevailing idea of government as 
“an umbrella that spreads across society, 
so the rest of us don’t have to do anything”. 

Britain can only continue to be open, 
officials argue, if it is more secure against 
hostile states. A toughened foreign-invest- 
ment screening law came into force in 
April. Ministers plan powers to block 
stock-exchange listings on national-secu- 
rity grounds, and to shield university re- 
search from espionage. The Home Office 
intends to modernise the Official Secrets 
Act, and to adopt an American-style regis- 
ter of lobbyists and ad men acting for for- 
eign interests. Last year the government 
acknowledged the existence of JSTAT, a 
Whitehall body monitoring hostile states. 

Most of these grand plans still have to 
be implemented, and the culture of White- 
hall does not encourage crisis planning. 
Ministers churn through departments. The 
government has never held so much data, 
yet ministers say they feel in the dark 
about threats. Ms Mordaunt thinks they 
need mandatory crisis-training, and 
Whitehall rigorous and regular exercises. 

At the moment, risks are divvied up 
among departments, and those that are not 
in charge often do little—thus the Depart- 
ment for Education had no plans for home 
schooling when the pandemic hit. Plans 
are not scrutinised by MPs, or external 
watchdogs. The answer, says Sir David Li- 
dington, a former cabinet office minister, 
is greater pressure from the prime minis- 





=a 
Hard talk 
Britain, use of words in parliamentary debates 
350 
300 
Efficiency/efficient 250 
200 
150 
. Hm 100 
bea", 7 , ail - - Ms 50 
a a a] a en SG) Mes ers gomeen Gee ay i Doe 


2010 =12 14 16 18 21 


Source: Hansard 


ter, and binding targets for improving re- 
Silience. “If you don't get a clear direction 
from the most senior political level, inertia 
creeps in,’ he says. 

Amore resilient state will be expensive, 
atatime when money will be tight. The tra- 
jectory for the public finances is uncertain, 
and Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, has alrea- 
dy pencilled in further cuts to all depart- 
ments other than health, schooling and de- 
fence. Mr Johnson has other priorities, in- 
cluding busting a backlog in courts and 
hospitals, and “levelling up” poor towns. 
Greater restrictions on foreign investment 
will mean lower tax revenues, and paying 


Britain 39 


more for infrastructure. 

Mr Cameron’s years of austerity left 
public services less able to handle covid-19. 
PPE stockpiles dwindled and municipal 
emergency-planning budgets were cut by 
35% in a decade. Britain has fewer hospital 
beds than France and Germany per person. 
Ministers face difficult choices, say offi- 
cials, over whether to direct spending to 
new projects or to put “contingent capabil- 
ity” (ie, Slack) back into the system. That 
sort of capability was once hard to justify, 
but crisis has revived an old idea of the 
state; one that fears the worst, and attends 
to the just-in-case. @ 


Turf wars 


The fight to define the great British garden 


N GARDENS across Britain the grass has 
I stopped growing. They are not parched 
or drought-stricken. In fact, they are 
greener and more immaculate than 
before. That is because the lawns are 
actually synthetic substitutes made from 
thermoplastic polymers. 

Britons are fascinated by lawns. 
Country estates have long competed to 
have the most perfectly manicured grass- 
land. “What you're saying in big loud 
capital letters, is ‘I’m so flipping 
wealthy’,” says Fiona Davison of the Royal 
Horticultural Society (RHS). With the 
advent of the lawnmower in 1830, the 
middle classes joined the fun. 

But now Britons have fallen in love 
with artificial grass. Evergreens UK, 
which sells the stuff, says it has seena 
120% rise in sales since 2015. Grass Direct 
reports they are up by 50% this year. 
Betap, a Dutch firm, has launched its first 
British designs. These match different 
regions: Scottish turf is darker than 
Cornish turf. 

Artificial grass is popular with fam- 
ilies who have children or dogs and don't 
want mud traipsed through their houses. 
It has a glamour factor, too. Andy Driver 
of Evergreens UK Says people now see 
gardens as “outside rooms’ —pairing 
carpets of artificial turf with elaborate 
decked seating and hot tubs. 

Not everyone is a fan. Artificial grass- 
es contain microplastics that ruin soil, 
impede drainage and risk flooding. A 
study finds earthworms gain 14% less 
body weight when operating under 
crumb rubber, a form of artificial grass. 
That might not bea problem for its fans, 
as worm holes area regular nuisance, but 
it dismays green types. Extinction Rebel- 
lion dug up artificial turf outsidea 
church in Harrogate in protest. 





Preparing the battlefield 


Ms Davison Says a rival tribe of wild- 
life-loving gardeners is blooming, many 
having caught the bug during covid-19 
lockdowns. Jack Wallington, a landscape 
designer, says they like things less man- 
icured and try “to capture that wild ele- 
ment”. These eco-gardeners are influ- 
enced by rewilding projects and are more 
likely to be environmentalists. 

Three petitions have tried to stop 
altificial grass spreading. The govern- 
ment says regulating what people doin 
their backyards is wrong. The RHS is 
concerned about artificial grass, but 
prefers persuasion to legislation. “Like 
Mao we Say ‘Let a hundred flowers 
bloom,” says Ms Davison. The Hundred 
Flowers Campaign, where Chinese peo- 
ple could openly criticise the Commu- 
nist Party, preceded an ideological crack- 
down. Britain’s earthworms may be 
hoping that the RHS’s vanguardists man- 
age the same. 


4o._—sCBrritain 


Bagehot | Tolerating intolerance 


A parallel society is developing in parts of Muslim Britain 





=———e, bg St SE) OS ee ee aS eee ee 


H 


| li 1 
r _— : Vay 


eS at oe 





eee ee ee 


RITAIN HAS a glorious tradition of writers getting on their 

bikes, real or metaphorical, and peddling off to discover the 
country. Two of the best examples of the genre were published 
during the Great Depression, J.B. Priestley’s “English Journey” 
(1934) and George Orwell’s “The Road to Wigan Pier” (1937). Bill Bry- 
son had such a hit with “Notes from a Small Island” (1995), selling 
more than 2m copies, that he decided to repeat the exercise with 
“The Road to Little Dribbling” 20 years later. 

Ed Husain’s new book, “Among the Mosques’, is a fascinating 
addition to this tradition, taking readers inside religious institu- 
tions that most non-Muslims only experience as domes on the ho- 
rizon. The country’s first two mosques were founded in Liverpool 
in 1887, in a terraced house, and in Woking in 1889, on a grander 
scale. There are now almost 2,000 Serving a Muslim population of 
more than 3m. Some heavily Muslim areas such as Blackburn’s 
Bastwell district have several in the same street. But what goes on 
inside? And what is their relationship with wider society? 

Mr Husain is the ideal man to answer these questions. The son 
of an Indian father and a mother who migrated from what is today 
Bangladesh, he won a prize for reciting the Koran as a child and 
spent much of his 20s in the Middle East perfecting his Arabic. He 
has written two books on Islam and has a broad intellectual hin- 
terland. He wrote a php thesis under the supervision of the con- 
servative British philosopher, Roger Scruton, and has worked fora 
number of think-tanks including the Council on Foreign Rela- 
tions in America. 

Mr Husain discovered much to be pleased about. Britain has 
absorbed a big Muslim population better than its ancient foe, 
France. On May 6th London re-elected its first Muslim mayor, La- 
bour’s Sadig Khan. Several young politicians such as Naz Shah, MP 
for Bradford West, represent the modern face of the religion. 

There is also a darker story. The British establishment that pre- 
sided over the immigration which followed the second world war 
expected Islamic migrants to melt into wider society and relax 
their religious views. But in parts of the country Muslim commu- 
nities are distancing themselves from wider British society and 
adopting stricter versions of their faith. 

This is particularly true in the old mill towns of Yorkshire and 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Lancashire, which now contain parallel societies, where the faith- 
ful can live their day-to-day lives without mixing. Mosques run 
schools and pronounce on Islamic law. Restaurants offer gender 
segregation under the polite name of “family seating”. 

These societies are dominated by a clerical class that extends 
its influence into secular society by, for example, endorsing candi- 
dates for Parliament. Mr Husain visited mosque after mosque that 
taught a highly literal interpretation of Islam, sometimes clinging 
to arguments that are being dropped in the Middle East. He saw 
shops displaying books that advocate stoning gays or keeping 
wives in purdah or waging jihad. Sayyid Qutb, Osama bin Laden’s 
favourite philosopher, appeared often. 

Many of these clerics belong to religious groupings with roots 
far from these shores. Saudi Wahhabis pour money into British 
mosques and offer all-expenses-paid scholarships to young Brit- 
ish Muslims. More surprising is the importance of the Deobandis. 
Mr Husain claims more than half of the country’s mosques now 
belong to the movement, which began in India and seeks to re- 
build the caliphate from the ground up, convert by convert. Dews- 
bury, a historic market town in Yorkshire, is the European capital 
of the largest Muslim organisation in the world, the Tableeghi Ja- 
maat, the movement’s evangelical arm. 

Why does this matter? Religious minorities have always clung 
together, the better to preserve their faith. Look at the Quakers 
during the Industrial Revolution or Orthodox Jews in Manchester 
or London today. Isn't “a parallel society” just a derogatory name 
for a flourishing subculture? And isn't the Catholic church also an 
example of foreign influence? It is no business of the state to make 
windows into people's souls. 

There are nevertheless good reasons to be worried. One is the 
paradox of toleration. There are limits to how much liberal societ- 
ies can tolerate people who call for gays to be stoned or who de- 
nounce Ms Shah as “a dog” because she fails to wear a hijab. The 
radicalised version of Islam being preached by clerics not only 
promotes intolerance but also fosters extremism. 

A second is the paradox of diversity. The welfare state that lib- 
erals hold dear depends for its legitimacy on people feeling that 
they have a common identity. Robert Putnam, a Harvard sociolo- 
gist, has demonstrated that support for the provision of public 
goods falls sharply if people think that the recipients are strikingly 
different from them. It is hard to be more strikingly different than 
the parallel communities of Dewsbury and Bradford. 


State failure 

The third is more practical. Britain is witnessing a struggle for the 
soul of Islam. But the state has repeatedly acted as if it is on the 
side of the forces of reaction rather than those of enlightenment. It 
has kowtowed to self-proclaimed community leaders, mistaking 
hardline beliefs for “authenticity”. It has tolerated schools such as 
Darul Uloom, in Rochdale, that combines GCSE instruction with 
requiring students to memorise the Hadiths, including ones 
about beating wives and stoning homosexuals. And it has failed to 
make a compelling case for Britishness. Mr Husain points out that 
many Muslim children get a warts-and-all account of British his- 
tory from their schools, while hearing constant praise for Turkey 
and Saudi Arabia in their madrassas. The trauma of Brexit has 
created a palpable desire to cure many of the social and geographic 
divisions that threaten to divide the country into warring tribes. 
Mr Husain makes a compelling case that that quest should not ig- 
nore the world of the mosque. @ 


The 


Economist 





SPECIAL 
REPORT: 


Brazil 


June 5th 2021 
A difficult decade 
The economy 


Corruption and crime 








The Amazon: money trees 
Reforming politics 

Of Bibles and ballots 

The prospects 


= s 














JAS. Feeding the world with the best there is. 


GLOBAL WARMING IS A FACT. 
AND IT IS ALSO A FACT THAT THE 
TIME TO ACT IS NOW. 


JBS, ONE OF THE WORLD'S LEADING FOOD PRODUCERS, IS COMMITTED TO NET ZERO 
EMISSIONS BY 2040. WE HAVE ALREADY STARTED OUR JOURNEY AND WE WILL INVEST 
MORE THAN $1 BILLION IN ACTIONS TO FIGHT CLIMATE CHANGE. 





JBS launched a global program that includes a roadmap to reach net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2040: 
JBS Net Zero 2040. Our commitment extends throughout the entire value chain — from farmers to consumers. 
Our goal is to help our planet limit global warming to 1.5°C, and achieve a climate neutral world for all. 


By 2030, JBS will invest $1 billion in projects to reduce emissions in our facilities, and $100 million in research 
to support new solutions for regenerative farming practices. By 2040, we will use 100% clean energy, and 
achieve climate neutrality across our global family of companies. 


Our Responsible Raw Material Procurement Policy is based on zero illegal deforestation, and we are extending 
our monitoring to the suppliers of our suppliers to help protect forests and preserve biodiversity. 


Our 250,000 team members worldwide have embraced this commitment. Leadership compensation across 
our global operations will be tied to goals for reducing our climate impacts. 


This will not be easy, but it must be done. We have taken the first steps in our journey. We invite you to join us. 
The story of our planet is being written every day, and together we can write a new chapter. 


JBS Net Zero 2040. 


To see how we are bringing our plans to life, visit: jbs.com.br/netzero/en 


ff 


CIBS) _izey | 
, (NZ®)) —_ ie 


' 






| 


WMcCANN | 25 


The captain and his country 





Brazil is backsliding. Jair Bolsonaro and covid-19 are but the latest in a decade of disasters, argues Sarah Maslin 


NE Day in April, as Brazilian hospitals ran out of oxygen and 
O33 600 people a day were dying from covid-19, Jair Bolsonaro’s 
64-year-old chief of staff, Luiz Eduardo Ramos, got jabbed. It was 
his turn but he went in secret. His boss is anti-vaccine. When 
asked why Brazil was blocking approval for the Pfizer vaccine, the 
president joked that jabs turn people into crocodiles. 

That Mr Ramos, a four-star general who once commanded 
peacekeeping troops in Haiti, had to sneak off reveals the depths 
to which Brazil has fallen under Mr Bolsonaro, whose career as an 
army captain stood out only when he was jailed for insubordina- 
tion. Mr Ramos confessed his jab in a meeting he didn’t know was 
being broadcast. “Like every human being, I want to live,” he said. 

Before the pandemic, Brazil was suffering from a decade of po- 
litical and economic ailments. With Mr Bolsonaro as its doctor, it 
is now in acoma. More than 87,000 Brazilians died from covid-19 
in April, the worst monthly death toll in the world at the time. Vac- 
cines are so scarce that people under 60 will not get them until 
September. And a record 14.4% of workers are unemployed. 

Yet on May ist bolsonaristas draped in Brazilian flags took to the 
streets. Unfazed by a parliamentary commission of inquiry (CPI) 
into the president’s handling of covid-19, they applauded his re- 
fusal to wear a mask, his support for hydroxychloroquine and his 
wish to send the army to obstruct stay-at-home orders. Fans in Sao 
Paulo begged for “military intervention”. One woman told a visitor 
that Brazil had never had a civil war. “It’s about time,” she said. 


Swap Portuguese for English and green and yellow for red, 
white and blue, and the rally could have been in the United States 
last year. Mr Bolsonaro borrowed heavily from Donald Trump’s 
tactics to win election in 2018: populism, nationalism, chauvin- 
ism and fake news. Brazil was traumatised from corruption, reces- 
sion, worsening public services and violent crime. Brazilians were 
fed up with politicians who had failed to solve these problems. Mr 
Bolsonaro channelled their frustration. 

He portrayed himself as an outsider even though he had spent 
27 years as a backbench congressman, making news only when he 
Said something offensive about women, indigenous people or 
gays. A fan of the military dictatorship of 1964-85, he often posed 
with his thumbs and forefingers cocked as if he were shooting a 
machinegun. Once in office, he aimed it straight at Brazil’s demo- 
cratic institutions. 


Ten years ago, Mr Bolsonaro’s election would have been unthink- 
able. After the dictatorship Brazil reformed itself. A constitution 
signed in 1988 created independent institutions. A new currency 
in 1994 tamed inflation. Acommodity boom in the 2000s brought 
jobs. With cash in their wallets, Brazilians saw their lives improve. 
Under the presidency of Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, Brazil joined 
Russia, India and China in the BRIc bloc of fast-growing emerging 
economies. It led climate talks and was awarded both the 2014 | 


wim Special report Brazil 









A multi-dimensional country 


Brazil —— 
Monthly income 
per person, 2020, $ 
150 200 250 300 350 
Brazilian ee ee ee ae 
Brazilian 
aes nerenmn Amapa Cerrado 
Manaus 
Para ‘ . 
Amazonas Maranhao Ceara Sl Brasilia 
Porto oP 
Velho. Piaui | ~~ 
_ Barra de st 
fake Rondénia *®Lapetanha Tocantins Se i 
ahia _ 
en Mato Grosso Salvador —_ 
Setembro Goids ™ Brasilia Covid-19 deaths 
territory Mato a per 100,000 people* 
} spirito 
Gross0 Pag Gerais eh 125.150 200 250 300 
EEE 
Paulo e - ® Riode Janeiro 
Parana Sao Paulo ; 
Santa Catarina A 
Rio Grande Jt: 
do Sul i f Aone 





*To May 23rd 2021 TAt least one dose 
Sources: IBGE; Ministry of Health; TerraBrasilis 


» football World Cup and the 2016 Olympic games. 

Then the commodity boom ended. Protests in 2013 over a rise 
in bus fares turned into protests aimed at bringing down the left- 
wing Workers’ Party (PT) government. An anti-corruption probe 
launched in 2014, known as Lava Jato (Car Wash), found that doz- 
ens of companies had paid bribes to politicians in exchange for 
contracts with Petrobras, the state oil firm. The economy crashed 
after irresponsible spending by Lula’s successor, Dilma Rousseff. 
Bigger, angrier demonstrations led to Ms Rousseff’s impeachment 
in 2016. Her replacement, Michel Temer, was accused of graft and 
barely escaped impeachment in 2017. 

Mr Bolsonaro’s election followed these traumas. He had little 
funding or airtime, but was boosted when he was stabbed while 
campaigning. Casting himself as Brazil’s saviour, he won 55% of 
the vote. His support was highest in the south and south-east, the 
richest and whitest regions, and among conservatives like farmers 
and evangelicals. Millions backed him out of anger at the PT. Mr 
Bolsonaro seemed to many voters to be the lesser of two evils. 

Many pundits said that Brazil's institutions would withstand 
his authoritarian instincts. So far they have proved right. Al- 
though Mr Bolsonaro says it would be easy to carry out a coup, he 
has not done it. But in a broader sense, the pundits were wrong. 
His first 29 months in office have shown that Brazil's institutions 
are not as strong as was thought, and they have weakened under 
his battering. Claudio Couto, a political scientist at Fundacao Ge- 
tulio Vargas, a university in Sao Paulo, likens them to brakes ona 
car hurtling down a hill. “If pushed too 
hard they can fail,” he says. nT Ps 

Take the judiciary. Lava Jato seemed the | 
triumph of the decade. Brazilians hoped Mr Bolsonaro 
anti-corruption reforms would usher in seemedtom any 
cleaner lawmakers who would act for the Wotsieto be the 
people not themselves. But some Lava Jato . 
prosecutors and judges had a political lesser of two evils 
agenda. This paved the way for Mr Bolsona- 
ro, in the face of allegations against his 
sons, to shut down the investigation. Its 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


closure helped not only corrupt politi- 
cians, but also organised-crime groups. 
— The economy badly needs reforms to 


Unemployment, 
2020, % 


10 12 14 16 18 
ee ee ee 


curb the growth of public spending, boost 

competitiveness and tackle inequality. Asa 

candidate, Mr Bolsonaro briefly professed 

| belief in liberal economics. He hired Paulo 

: of. - Guedes, a free-marketeer educated at the 

| j dai University of Chicago, as economy minis- 

=e ter. Then he abandoned both, refusing to 

L & back changes that might cost votes. After a 

> pensions revamp in 2019, Mr Guedes'’s re- 

form agenda stalled. Six of the ten mem- 

bers of his economic “dream team” have 
— quit or been fired. 

The pandemic has wiped out all net jobs 
created since the recession of 2014-16, 
sending millions of people back into pov- 
erty. None of Mr Bolsonaro’s four educa- 
tion ministers created a workable dis- 
tance-learning system. One lasted just five 
days before he was found to have padded 
his resumé with fake degrees from Argen- 
tinaand Germany. Some 35m children have 
been out of school for 15 months, a drag on 
social mobility for years to come. 

In politics “the promise of renewal was 
a big lie,’ says Mr Couto. In 2018 voters 
kicked out much of the traditional political class. For the first time 
Congress has more novices than incumbents. A tiny group com- 
mitted to fiscal responsibility and other reforms offers hope for 
the future. But most politicians remain gluttons of pork and pa- 
tronage. After denouncing the system, Mr Bolsonaro joined it to 
save himself from over 100 impeachment petitions. 

He has done most damage to the Amazon rainforest, which in 
Brazil now emits more carbon than it stores because of climate 
change and deforestation. The president does not believe in the 
first and sympathises with those doing the second: loggers, min- 
ers and ranchers. He took a chainsaw to the environment minis- 
try, cutting its budget and forcing out competent staff. Reducing 
deforestation requires firmer policing and investment in eco- 
nomic alternatives. Neither looks likely. 

At first covid-19 helped Mr Bolsonaro. Big spending on busi- 
nesses and the poor distracted from his failure to pass fiscal re- 
forms. His approval ratings briefly hit their highest since he took 
office. Last July he contracted covid-19 and recovered quickly, as he 
had promised he would. It seemed that the economy might do the 
Same, paving the way for his re-election in 2022. 

Then, in early 2021, Brazil was hit bya second wave with a more 
infectious variant from the Amazon city of Manaus. As social me- 
dia filled with images of people in nearby Chile lining up for jabs, 
gravediggers in Brazil were busy. Mr Bolsonaro continued to rail 
against lockdowns and vaccines. Ina cabinet shake-up he fired the 
defence minister, who had reportedly refused to pledge his loyal- 
ty. The heads of the three armed forces resigned in protest, briefly 
fuelling rumours of a coup. 

It did not happen. Yet this special report argues that Brazil is 
facing its biggest crisis since the return to democracy in 1985. Its 
challenges are daunting: economic stagnation, political polarisa- 
tion, environmental ruin, social regress and a covid-19 nightmare. 
And it has had to endure a president who is undermining govern- 
ment itself. His cronies have replaced career officials. His decrees 
have strained checks and balances everywhere. Consider Diario 
Oficial da Unido, where every legal change is published, says Lilia 
Schwarcz, a historian. “There is a coup every day.” & 


Covid-19 vaccinations 
per 100 people*t 
bs 16—-48--20.:..22 





The Economist June 5th 2021 


SY oJ =Fol F-] a=) oe) es) e-¥4] 





A dream deferred 


After a generation of progress, social mobility is slowing 


INICIUS RABELO’S grandparents were manioc farmers in the 
V interior of Bahia. His parents moved to the city for a better life 
and, after opening a clothes shop, sent their children to private 
school. In 2018 Mr Rabelo started as an electrical mechanic in Ca- 
macari, near the state capital, Salvador. Home to a petrochemical 
plant and a Ford factory, Camacari had almost doubled in popula- 
tion over his lifetime. More than 40m Brazilians had joined an 
emerging middle class known as Classe C. 

By the time he entered the workforce, the country was reeling 
from a recession that chopped 9% off GpP per head between 2014 
and 2016. Unemployment stayed high and hundreds of factories 
closed. In January Ford said it was leaving. For 5,000 employees 
and tens of thousands of indirect workers, including Mr Rabelo, 
whose firm did safety checks, the job loss was compounded by a 
sense that social mobility had stopped. The 24-year-old, who has 
trendy glasses and an Apple Watch, now drives for Uber, “like 800 
others who got laid off and had the exact same idea”. 

Under President Fernando Henrique Cardoso in the 1990s, Bra- 
Zil’s Real Plan ended hyperinflation, allowing Brazilians to start 
Saving again. Under Lula in the 2000s, poverty fell by 41% thanks 
to a commodity boom, social programmes and rises in the min- 
imum wage. The 2010s were meant to continue this progress. In- 
stead it was a decade of bad policies and worse luck. 

The PT, in power from 2003 to 2016, failed to build on its gains. 
Between 2003 and 2012, GDP growth averaged 4%. Informal work- 
ing shrank and wages climbed. The government built thousands 
of schools, from creches to universities. Bolsa Familia, a cash- 
transfer programme, gave poor mothers a basic income. Light for 
All brought electricity to favelas and rural areas. Millions bought 
cars and took their first plane rides. Marcelo Neri, an economist, 
found that rising perceptions of well-being outpaced GpP growth 
as tangible changes made Brazilians feel better off than they really 
were. Between 2006 and 2009, Brazil moved up five places on a 
Gallup ranking of happiness, to17th among 144 countries. 

The optimism proved ephemeral. The PT did not invest enough 
in areas promising long-term productivity gains, like infrastruc- 
ture. Despite expanded access to education (85% of pupils com- 
pleted primary school in 2018, up from 50% in 2000), quality 
lagged behind. On the latest PISA tests of learning among 15-year- 
olds, Brazil came 57th out of 79 countries in reading. One analysis 
estimated that it would take 260 years to reach the OECD average. 
After 15 months without in-person classes, the outlook is worse. 
Some 15% of six- to 17-year-olds may have dropped out of school. 

“We expected better,” says Valterlinda Alves, a professor in Ca- 
macari. For nearly a decade the economy was booming and the 
mayor, governor and president all came from the PT. But the best 
jobs at the petrochemical plant still went to workers from Salvador 
or Sao Paulo. In 2018 Ms Alves persuaded the Federal University of 
Bahia to open a campus in Camacari, aimed at teaching STEM sub- 
jects to local students. After budget cuts its future is uncertain. Ov- 
er the years, unions won pay bumps. Yet the median salary when 
Ford closed was only 3,800 reais ($720) a month, three times the 
minimum wage. “Middle class in Brazil means just scraping by,” 
says Jorge do Nascimento, a foreman. 

Worse trouble hit when Lula gave up pro-business reforms and 


Ms Rousseff launched an industrial policy redolent of import sub- 
stitution. The development bank pumped subsidised loans worth 
up to 9% of GDP a year into favoured firms, while the finance min- 
istry hid a growing deficit. The result was Brazil’s worst-ever reces- 
sion. It overlapped with Lava Jato, which dealt an extra blow in Ca- 
macari, where affected firms like Petrobras and private construc- 
tion companies employed thousands. Tax breaks worth billions of 
dollars no longer made up for low productivity and high costs. 
Ford’s exit came after years of losses. 

The protests in 2013 demanded even more subsidies. But as un- 
rest continued, Brazilians seemed to conclude that the entire 
economy needed a revamp. In 2016 Congress impeached Ms Rous- 
seff for breaking budget rules. Mr Temer, her successor, charged 
ahead with liberal reforms, slashing subsidised lending, creating 
a constitutional ceiling on spending and passing a labour reform 
to make contracts more flexible. All the frontrunners in the 2018 
election (except for Fernando Haddad, who became the PT candi- 
date after Lula was barred) talked of curbing public spending. 

Soon after taking office in 2019, Mr Bolsonaro signed a pen- 
sions reform that will save 80obn reais over a decade. Mr Guedes 
bragged that reforms to simplify the tax code, slim down the pub- 
lic sector and privatise inefficient state firms would follow. Yet the 
reformist spirit proved fleeting. Mr Bolsonaro is not much ofa lib- 
eral. His distaste for hard reforms made it easy for Congress to ig- 
nore the Guedes agenda. 

Victories were smaller: a law opening sanitation to private in- 
vestment, the sale of oil refineries and subsidiaries of state firms, 
a measure allowing a freeze of civil-service salaries when manda- 
tory spending exceeds 95% of revenues. A trade deal between the 
European Union and the Mercosur bloc of South American coun- 
tries stalled because of Mr Bolsonaro’s environmental policies. 
Growth averaged just 1% a year between 2017 and 2019. 


Enter covid-19 
Covid-19 put an already troubled economy on life support. Health- 
care and stimulus spending pushed public debt to a record 89% of 
GDP in 2020. Mr Guedes predicted that support to businesses and 
monthly payments to 68m informal workers would spur a “v- 
shaped recovery’. But although poverty briefly dipped and a drop 
of GDP in 2020 by 4.1% was not as bad as feared, the second wave 
shut the economy again. GDP is expected to shrink in the second 
quarter of this year. Payments to the poor were slashed just as the 
pandemic worsened. Some18m more people fell into poverty. 

The future looks grim. Just 19% of Brazilians have been vacci- 
nated, making a third wave quite possible. The currency has fallen 
by 25% against the dollar since covid-19 broke out. Inflation rose to >> 





Into the pit 
Brazil 
GDP Unemployment rate Real per $ 
% change on a year earlier % Inverted scale 
9 16 1 
14 5 
12 
10 3 
8 4 
6 
5 
4 
“ 6 





2010 20% 2010 20* 


1995 


Sources: IMF; Refinitiv Datastream 


1995 1995 201021 


*Estimate 


a 6Special report Brazil 






» 7% in April. The central bank is raising interest rates for the first 
time since 2015. A poster campaign in Sao Paulo decried rising 
prices of food staples and blamed them on President “Bolsocaro”, a 
play on the Portuguese words for “pocket” and “expensive”. 

Camacari'’s industrial sector sits on the outskirts of town, past 
tyre shops, big-box stores and the region’s first shopping mall. Its 
streets are ambitiously named: Benzene, Hydrogen, Oxygen. But 
its smokestacks are faded and its pipes rusty. The town centre is 
busier, but people are not buying much. Mothers with children 
stand in line to find out if they qualify for new emergency pay- 
ments. One survey found that six out of ten Brazilians have re- 
duced the quantity or quality of food they eat. 

The mayor predicts that Ford’s closure will cost15% of the city’s 
jobs. Ford employees will lose their private health insurance, 
which will strain public hospitals. Alan Lima, head of a network of 
private schools, says his enrolment has dropped from 2,000 to 
1,250. “I look at yesterday, I look at today, and it’s starting to seem 
like yesterday was better than today,’ says Ana Paula Luz, a mother 
of five who used to work on a motor assembly line. Some 65% of 
Brazilians think the economy will get worse, the highest propor- 
tion since the poll began in 1997. 

There are glimmers of hope. Agriculture is booming, commod- 
ity prices are up again and Camacari is becoming a logistics hub 
between Salvador and western Bahia. Mercado Libre, Latin Amer- 
ica’s e-commerce giant, has opened a distribution centre nearby. 
Bahia is Brazil’s top source of wind power 
and turbines are made in Camacari, _ SS 
though firms have hired technicians from 
India. Tourism is growing but cumber- Brazil is suffering 
some tax laws, licensing and labour rules 4 confidence 
make investors “think twice before open- 

. : A collapse, declares 
ing a hotel,’ says Joao Eca, head of a resort Lie 

run by Tivoli, a Portuguese hotelier, ona Arminio Fraga 
beach near Camacari. 

To get back on track, Brazil must deal 
with old problems. Subsidies to industry 
and public servants are skewed to the well-off. Tax and labour laws 
distort or discourage investment. And 94% of the budget is eaten 
up by mandatory spending adjusted for inflation, leaving less and 
less for public investment and social programmes. Yet politicians 
drag their feet. Congress plans to split tax reform into several sep- 
arate bills. In April it passed a budget exceeding the spending ceil- 
ing by 30bn reais, including a9bn reais-worth of pork for con- 
gressmen’s home states. Rather than trying to curb wasteful 
spending, politicians changed the constitution to exclude their 
projects from the fiscal rules. “Our idea of development continues 
to be that the state hands over money to build factories and create 
jobs,” says Marcos Lisboa of Insper, a business school in Sao Paulo. 

Substantial reform is unlikely before the election in 2022. Bra- 
zil remains a closed economy, with red tape driving down growth 
and skewed spending driving up inequality. In 2019 the average in- 
come of the richest 1% was 33.7 times that of the poorest 50%, a ra- 
tio surpassed only in Qatar. A study by the OECD in 2018 found that 
it would take a Brazilian family from the poorest 10% of earners 
nine generations to reach the average income. 

The risk is not Argentina-style default or Venezuela-style 
hyperinflation (most of Brazil’s debt is in its own currency). In- 
stead, itis stagflation, or low growth, high unemployment and ris- 
ing prices. Brazil is suffering a “confidence collapse’, declares Ar- 
minio Fraga, a former central-bank president. He once suggested 
reforms to save 9% of GDP: 3% from eliminating tax breaks, 3% 
from narrowing the gap between public- and private-sector pay, 
3% from a second pensions reform. Now he says: “We keep look- 
ing for short cuts and magic tricks, but we’re not going anywhere 
until we get the political system in order.’ & 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Sliding back 


Revelations of graft have fuelled anti-establishmentism 


N 1969 A Bahian construction firm called Odebrecht began work 
Lon a brutalist building in Rio de Janeiro, which was to be the 
headquarters of Petrobras. It was an exciting moment: Petrobras 
had found oil off the coast and Odebrecht would become Brazil’s 
biggest contractor. But 45 years later came Lava Jato, when scores 
of businessmen were jailed, including Odebrecht’s boss. 

Brazilian corruption has roots in a promiscuous relationship 
between the state and private firms. The dictatorship was Ode- 
brecht’s chief customer. Norberto Odebrecht, its founder, saw cor- 
ruption as a cost of doing business. He wrote in a bible for staff 
that the client is not “the state” or “the government”, but an indi- 
vidual to satisfy by any means necessary. Odebrecht’s “Depart- 
ment of Structured Operations”, better known as the bribes office, 
kept a list of code names for over 400 politicians and officials. 

Many companies had similar practices. Odebrecht “played the 
game the best,’ says Malu Gaspar, author of a book about the firm. 
The cost rose with the return of democracy, which broughta pleth- 
ora of smaller parties, raising spending on political campaigns. 
Firms put up the cash, in under-the-table campaign donations. 
Odebrecht’s employees saw these as political contributions. “We 
knew that what we were doing wasn't right but the feeling was that 
it was not that wrong,’ says a former executive. 

Some scandals were investigated, but most “ended in pizza”, as 
the Brazilian saying goes. Businessmen rarely received more than 
a fine. Politicians mostly escaped punishment. As the economy 
grew, so did graft. Shell companies and Swiss bank accounts 
mushroomed. The pT even helped Odebrecht win contracts 
abroad. The existence of this scheme was no surprise, says Sérgio 
Lazzarini, who wrote a book in 2010 about how firms won con- 
tracts by donating to political campaigns. “But no one imagined 
how bad it was.” 

Lava Jato started with a money-laundering investigation of a 
petrol station in Brasilia. New tools such as plea-bargaining and 
exchange of financial information with foreign authorities un- 
covered the Petrobras scheme. The scandal contributed to Ms 
Rousseff's impeachment. The supreme court banned corporate 
donations to try to reduce the role of money in politics. Congress 
made it harder for smaller parties to leech off bigger ones. 

Seventy-eight Odebrecht employees signed plea bargains, in- 
cluding the boss, Marcelo Odebrecht, who spent 30 months in jail. 
Their testimony led to charges against 95 politicians, including 
Lula, who was convicted of taking bribes. Companies scrambled to 
reassure shareholders that corruption would no longer be tolerat- 
ed. “We built a compliance department from scratch,’ says Joao 
Nogueira, who helped turn around Odebrecht. 

Lava Jato prosecutors and Transparency International pro- 
posed ten anti-corruption measures to make it easier to prosecute 
white-collar crime. Many congressmen backed ending foro privile- 
giado, a legal right that says politicians can be investigated for cor- 
ruption only by the supreme court. But Lava Jato made mistakes. 
First, prosecutors and the judge, Sergio Moro, cut corners. Many 
cases were thrown out for violating due process or for lack of evi- 
dence, and leaked messages revealed that Mr Moro was improper- 
ly coaching prosecutors. Second, some had partisan goals. Days 
before the election in 2018, Mr Moro released testimony against >> 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Special report Brazil 





» Lula. Mr Bolsonaro’s campaign was railing against corruption in 
the pT. The move seemed aimed at Mr Haddad, who lost in the sec- 
ond round. “Lava Jato is the mother and father of Bolsonaro,’ 
claims Gilmar Mendes, a supreme-court judge. 

Mr Bolsonaro chose Mr Moro to be his justice minister. In an 
Oedipal twist, he then went on to destroy Lava Jato. The obvious 
reason is that his eldest son, Flavio, a senator, was charged for em- 
bezzling the salaries of his employees while a state deputy in Rio. 
His three other sons are also under investigation, for alleged 
crimes ranging from running a fake news network to receiving a 
car from a businessman seeking influence (all deny wrongdoing). 

Mr Bolsonaro wants to wreck institutions, not reform them. 
During the campaign his son Eduardo, now a federal deputy, said 
that a “soldier and a corporal” would suffice to close the supreme 
court. In May 2020 Mr Bolsonaro almost ordered the army to do 
this when he heard that the court might allow police to seize an- 
other son’s mobile phone. According to Piaui, an investigative 
magazine, generals in his cabinet talked him down. After Mr Bol- 
sonaro fired the head of the Federal Police, Mr Moro quit, accusing 
the president of obstructing justice. This year, the attorney-gener- 
al chosen by Mr Bolsonaro disbanded the Lava Jato task-force. 

“If we were an institutionally mature country, we'd improve 
the model,” says Mr Lazzarini. “Instead we throw it out.” In April 
the supreme court annulled Lula’s convictions because Mr Moro 
was biased. The ruling paves the way for him to run again for pres- 
ident in 2022, and perhaps for other politicians to have their cases 
annulled. The lower-house whip in Congress has suggested re- 
pealing a law against nepotism. New revelations that the develop- 
ment ministry provided 3bn reais for congressmen to buy tractors 
and other farm equipment at inflated prices undermine Mr Bolso- 
naro’s claim that there have been no scandals since he took office. 

The Petrobras building looks out on other landmarks that once 
seemed monuments to progress but have become symbols of 
graft. North is Maracana stadium, tainted by charges that the ex- 
governor, Sérgio Cabral, pocketed 60m reais in the run-up to the 
2014 World Cup. East is Guanabara Bay, due to be cleaned before 
the 2016 Olympics but still polluted, partly because of corruption. 





Would you trust them? 


Even the famous Christ the Redeemer statue was at risk of losing 
its arms before money was raised for repairs in 2015. 

Something else towers over Rio’s poorest residents: criminal 
mafias known as militias. These heavily armed groups of off-duty 
cops and other thugs thrive on poverty and state negligence. They 
are being strengthened by Mr Bolsonaro. 


Shadow state 

Lots of oil money may have sloshed around Rio, but little went to 
housing, transport or security for the bairros where waves of mi- 
grants from poorer states settled. Daniela (not her real name) 
moved to a favela called Rio das Pedras in 1997. Militias take pride 
in ridding favelas of drug dens and drug users. “There are things 
you have to pretend you don't see,” she says, scrolling through 
photos of two smiling teenagers in sweatshirts and, a few frames 
later, the same boys in a pool of blood. Residents have no choice 
but to accept militias’ rule. “They are the law,’ Daniela says. 

They are also the internet provider, the cable company, the 
cooking-gas distributor and the ride-share service. Every business 
in Rio das Pedras pays “security tax”, which is used to buy cars and 
guns and build illegal apartments. Deeds are handled by a dodgy 
neighbourhood association. This would not be possible without 
the blessing of the local police. “You don’t build an apartment 
complex overnight,” says Simone Sibilio, former head of the or- 
ganised-crime unit at the state prosecutors’ office. 

In the past, politicians have condoned militias. In 2006 Rio’s 
mayor called them a “lesser evil” than drug gangs. Flavio Bolsona- 
ro gave a medal to Adriano Magalhaes da Nobrega, a police captain 
who prosecutors say ran a militiain Rio das Pedras and committed 
eight murders. Flavio employed his mother and ex-wife; they al- 
legedly helped with his embezzlement. But the murder in 2018 of 
Marielle Franco, a city councilwoman who had denounced mili- 
tias, woke people up. Two cops-turned-hitmen with ties to the Rio 
das Pedras militia were charged. After the investigation, Ms Sibilio 
and her colleagues launched “Operation Untouchables”, aimed at 
the militia’s economic activities. Mr Nobrega fled before he could 
be arrested; he was killed in a police operation. Of the 62 alleged 
milicianos charged in the case, 15 are police officers. Many were 
jailed after a state parliamentary inquiry into militias in 2008 but 
freed after witnesses recanted or were killed. 

If the state wants to tackle militias, says Ms Sibilio, it must do 
more to root out corrupt cops. Police, prosecutors and financial 
watchdogs must collaborate. But the pendulum is moving in the 
opposite direction. The former governor of Rio, Wilson Witzel, 
weakened internal control within the police before he was im- 
peached for covid-related graft last year. The state prosecutors’ of- 
fice recently closed several workgroups for complex crimes, in- 
cluding one that was investigating illegal construction by the Rio 
das Pedras militia. 

The media has pounced on links between militias and the Bol- 
sonaro family, of which there are plenty. Mr Bolsonaro lived in the 
Same gated community as one of Ms Franco’s alleged killers; he 
appeared ina photo with the other. Such ties are hardly surprising 
considering the Bolsonaros’ electoral base of cops and soldiers in 
western Rio. 

“The president has a paramilitary ideology,’ says Bruno Paes 
Manso, author of a book about militias. Mr Bolsonaro says “An 
armed public will never be enslaved” and has tried to pass 31 
changes making guns easier to own. Some but not all were sus- 
pended by the supreme court. The number of registered firearms 
has surged since 2017 by 66%, to over a million. Many more circu- 
late illegally. Mr Bolsonaro’s rhetoric is often geared to police and 
thugs. As a guest ona Tv show before Brazil passed 400,000 deaths 
from covid-19, he held a sign that said CPF cancelado (tax number 
cancelled), a phrase used by police and militias when they kill. @ 


8 BSylor-] a= lela ie-74) The Economist June 5th 2021 


Money trees 


The Amazon and its residents need sustainable development 


HE INDIGENOUS territory Sete de Setembro draws its name 

from the “first contact” with the Paiter Surui tribe: September 
7th1969. At the time, tribe members thought white men, with their 
pale skin and strange beards, were a sort of monster, whereas the 
indigenous were “real people’, or paiterey in their tongue. 

Cousins Almir and Henrique Surui were born in the following 
decade. As boys they saw the arrival of thousands of settlers, the 
conversion of tracts of forest to farmland and the death of hun- 
dreds of Surui from disease and violence. As men they became ca- 
ciques. But their paths diverged in the mid-2000s. Almir tried to 
protect the forest and find a sustainable income for his village, La- 
petanha, home to 115 of the tribe’s 1,500 members. Henrique got in- 
volved in illegal logging and mining, which led to his expulsion. 
He founded a village elsewhere in the territory, which spans near- 
ly a thousand square miles in RondOonia and Mato Grosso. 

Such rivalries reflect a double failure on the part of the govern- 
ment: to keep invaders off indigenous lands and to reduce the pov- 
erty driving people in the Amazon into illicit activities. Since 1969 
the region’s population has quadrupled to nearly 25m. It compris- 
es 60% of Brazil’s territory and 13% of its population but just 8% of 
GDP. The area richest in biodiversity and natural resources is 
among the least developed and most destitute. 

The consensus is that environmental enforcement must go 
hand-in-hand with sustainable development. What that looks like 
is debated. Last year Mr Bolsonaro submitted a bill to legalise min- 
ing on indigenous land. “Every day the Indian is more of a human 
being,’ he said. Many suspect the Indians are not his chief con- 
cern. His vision of big projects like highways and dams to serve 
farms and cities does not include them. His father was a miner. He 
has said itis “abusive” to non-indigenous Brazilians that less than 
1% of Brazil’s population occupies 14% of its territory. 

Polls find most Brazilians opposed to mining on indigenous 
land because it uproots trees, pollutes rivers and leaves huge pits 
behind. Their land needs more protection if it is to remain pris- 
tine. Satellite images of Ronddnia show farmland dotted with dirt 
roads and tiny towns. The only remaining big patches of forest are 
indigenous territories. This makes tribes natural supporters of a 
“bioeconomy’ that will save the forest and reduce poverty, say en- 
vironmentalists. In 1997 Philip Fearnside, a Manaus-based biolo- 
gist, wrote that “The mother lode waiting to be tapped is not a ma- 
terial commodity, but rather the forest’s environmental services.” 
Yet society has to work out how to pay people for protecting biodi- 
versity, carbon storage and water cycles. 

The problem is that, ever since the rubber boom in the late 
1800S, wealth and employment in the region have come from ex- 
traction: logging, mining, farming. In the 1970s the military re- 
gime built thousands of kilometres of roads through the rainfor- 
est for these activities. Colonisation programmes lured more than 
100,000 families to states like Rond6onia with the promise of “land 
without men for men without land”. To gain a deed toa plot of jun- 
gle they had to deforest half. As with the “manifest destiny” that 
drew Americans west, there was no mention of tribes already liv- 
ing on the land. Many were massacred or driven out. 

Brazil’s constitution of 1988 tried to put some of this right. It 
strengthened laws to protect the environment, laid out steps to 





What men without land do for gold 


demarcate hundreds of indigenous territories and boosted Funai, 
the agency responsible for them. It left open the possibility of ex- 
tractive activities on indigenous land, so long as Congress passed 
laws regulating them and local communities were consulted and 
paid. Mr Bolsonaro says they will be if his bill passes, but his gov- 
ernment has not sought their input. 

In the 1980s Funai introduced logging as asource of income for 
the Surui, but it was banned after it went out of control. The pro- 
tectionism of later governments was also unhelpful. Rules mak- 
ing it hard for indigenous people to sell produce from their land to 
businesses outside the Amazon “made it impossible for them to 
develop,’ says Ivaneide Cardozo of Kanindeé, an NGO in Rondonia. 
In 2000 Almir wrote a 50-year plan with goals for health and edu- 
cation and ideas for how to pay for them. “We're in the process of 
understanding what money means for us,’ he says. 

The road to Sete de Setembro weaves through rocky pastures 
filled with humped cattle. A wall of trees marks the entrance to the 
territory. Inside, the forest canopy blocks the sun and the air fills 
with bird sounds. Lapetanha has a maloca, where elders meet un- 
der a thatched-palm roof, along with a W1-Fi tower. In 2013 the Su- 
rui became the first indigenous group in the world to sell carbon 
credits under the UN’s anti-deforestation scheme (REDD+). Natu- 
Ia, a coSmetics company, bought 120,000. So did FIFA before the 
World Cup. The tribe received around 3m reais to protect trees, and 
used it for projects such as a coffee co-operative. 

But some tribe members claimed the money was not distribut- 
ed fairly. Henrique claims Almir took too much. The scheme could 
have won more funding but, with help from an NGo tied to the 
Catholic church, which has criticised carbon credits, Henrique 
sabotaged it. During an audit to vet his claims, loggers returned. 
The project was decertified. REDD+ projects are now popping up 
throughout the Amazon in hopes of a global carbon market, but >> 





the Surui case suggests that it may not be a straightforward suc- 
cess. And rich countries may prefer to buy credits at home. “Send- 
ing money to Brazil to stop deforestation doesn't do anything for 
the German economy,” Mr Fearnside says. 

The co-operative did better. Brazil's largest coffee firm, Trés Co- 
racdes, agreed to buy each harvest for 450 reais a sack (the co-op 
takes 20%). Each Surui family sells 30-40 sacks, depending on its 
plot and how many kids it has to pick berries. It is a lot of work for 
an income less than minimum wage. But the Amazon lacks initia- 
tives for more lucrative economies, like pharmaceuticals or cos- 
metics, says Denis Minev, who runs its largest department-store 
chain. He points out that the government invested billions to help 
Petrobras develop pre-salt technology, and the Embrapa agricul- 
tural-research institute to grow soy in the cerrado. The annual 
budget for the top research institute in the Amazon is 35m reais, 
less than the footballer Neymar earns in a month. 

Francisco Costa, an economist, says that 700,000 people still 
make a living from the forest, a sizeable group but one with an un- 
certain future. They are responsible for less than 5% of deforesta- 
tion; most comes from soy and cattle farms, which are expanding 
(mining causes degradation, a precursor). Farmers make more 
money from the growing market for beef 
and soy in Asia, while Amazonians in sus- i 
tainable trades like fishing or harvesting 
acai have seen their incomes stagnate. Itis | Environmental 


no wonder that some are turning to illegal enforcement 
nomi ivities. 
econo C activities | must go 
Before diamonds were discovered on : 
hand-in-hand 


Surui land, they were mined on a nearby 
reserve occupied by the Cinta Larga tribe. 
Garimpo (wildcat mining) brought wealth 
but also alcoholism, prostitution and debt. 


with sustainable 
development 


In 2004 the Cinta Larga killed 29 garimpeiros. Prospectors fled to 
other areas; mineral veins led them to Sete de Setembro. Almir for- 
bade the Surui from mining but Henrique gave them his blessing: 
“If the forest is going to be cut down, at least let it be by Indians.” 

According toa verbal agreement, 20% of profits are meant to go 
to the tribe, yet miners rarely keep their word. Henrique was once 
jailed for mining but he has been to the police countless times to 
report that Surui are being exploited. At a hearing in 2015, he ac- 
cused prosecutors and Funai of being complicit. “You’re in the 
hands of the miners and I’m the one who’s the thief?” he said. 
Three or four times a year, police descend on the mines, arrest the 
miners and set fire to their machines, which can cost 500,000 
reais. But the garimpeiros always return. Some 200 are in Sete de 
Setembro even now, Says an investigator. Fines are low, “So it’s al- 
ways worth it to try again. Coffee, Brazil nuts? Nothing is capable 
of competing with diamonds.” 


Mr Bolsonaro has squelched any initiatives that tried. In 2019 the 
environment minister, Ricardo Salles, launched a crusade against 
the Amazon Fund, through which Germany and Norway donated 
$1.2bn to projects that employ locals to protect the forest. Mr Salles 
accused NGOs of committing fraud, even though most of the mon- 
ey went to the ministry. He abolished two committees that over- 
saw funding and suggested using it to pay squatters who were 
kicked off conservation units. In the face of rising deforestation 
and fires, Germany and Norway withdrew their donations. 

In a secret meeting in April 2020, video of which was released 
by the supreme court, Mr Salles urged cabinet members to “push 
through all kinds of deregulation” while the press was distracted 
by covid-1ig. A day after telling President Joe Biden and other lead- 
ers at this year’s Earth Day summit that Brazil would double 
spending on environmental enforcement, Mr Bolsonaro signed a 
budget that cut it by 24%. When a police superintendent accused 
Mr Salles of obstructing a probe into illegal logging, he was fired. 
Brazil will have no problem meeting its goal of ending illegal de- 
forestation by 2030, the former chief tweeted, “Because there will 
be no forest left.” Mr Salles is under investigation for corruption. 

As the risk goes down, the reward goes up. The price of gold has 
soared by 40% since 2018, to more than $1,700 per ounce. This has 
drawn tens of thousands of hopefuls to wildcat mines. A gold rush 
in Para has split the Munduruku tribe and led to violence. Near the 
border with Venezuela, where the Yanomami tribe lives in isola- 
tion, 21 0f its members died of covid-19, including six babies. The 
virus was brought in by garimpeiros. Instituto Escolhas, another 
NGO, says lack of regulation makes garimpo far too easy. To sell 
gold to a bank, Brazilians need only fill out a form. The institute 
estimates that a third of the roughly 100 tonnes of gold mined in 
Brazil each year comes from garimpo. Most is illegal. 

Over 3,000 petitions have been filed to mine on indigenous 
land. Mr Bolsonaro’s government has approved 58, even though 
the law does not allow it. The permits mostly belong to big com- 
panies like Anglo American, though garimpeiros believe it is a mat- 
ter of time before their trade is condoned. “We're workers, not 
bums,” says Alison Oliveira, owner of one of more than 1,000 ille- 
gal barges that mine gold on the Madeira river outside Porto Velho, 
RondOnia’s capital. By night they dredge sand from the riverbed; 
by day, they sift through it with mercury, which sticks to gold. Ona 
good week, the flecks add up to an ounce or two. 

In January RondOnia passed a decree overturning a ban on ga- 
rimpo in rivers. Few barges have submitted papers to operate legal- 
ly (itis easier to bribe the marine force), but they see the decree asa 
step towards access to conservation areas where mining remains 
illegal. Porto Velho’s economy depends on gold, says Mr Oliveira. 
That politicians own barges is an open secret. He insists that min- | 


10 BBS)X-eE] ie) ole) a=) e-7 4] The Economist June 5th 2021 


aaa aaa aa aaa aaa) 
The wrong direction 
Brazil, annual deforestation of the Amazon rainforest, '000 km2 


30 


20 





1988 90 oo 2000 05 10 15 | 20 


Source: TerraBrasilis 


» ers have become more green-conscious: they now throw their rub- 
bish away in town. Sand tainted with mercury goes back into the 
river, though. When this correspondent visited, his workers were 
dumping it as dolphins played near the barge. 

Henrique Surui scrolls through photos on his phone of chem- 
ical-filled craters and laments that young Surui women want to 
marry only white miners. He feels sick when he thinks about how 
little the tribe has benefited from garimpo. “Bolsonaro is right 
when he says indigenous people need to evolve,” he says. Almir 
agrees. The death of both their mothers from covid-19 has reunited 
the cousins. They are talking of joining forces to kick out the min- 
ers and launch a new carbon-credit project. Henrique wants to 
find investors fora mine in which more profits would go to indige- 
nous people. Almir is sceptical but doesn't rule it out. “Of course 
we want development,’ he says. “Just not at any cost.” & 


In need of reform 


Brasilia is full of new politicians and old ideas 


ABATA AMARAL wanted to be an astrophysicist, nota politician. 

She was raised in the outskirts of Sao Paulo and graduated from 
Harvard in 2016. On her return she saw the sorry state of education 
in Brazil and decided only policy change would improve it. So she 
launched a bid for Congress and became a federal deputy at 24. On 
her first day in Brasilia in 2019, she learned why change is so hard. 
The son of another congressman was squatting in her state apart- 
ment and refused to leave. Politicians get lots of perks: a salary of 
405,000 reais, 25 advisers of their choice, free housing, and foro 
privilegiado, which makes them hard to punish. Parties are given 
2bn reais between them to run campaigns. State-sized districts re- 
quire big spending, so rich political clans usually win. In ex- 
change for their support, the president doles out jobs and pork. 

Some young politicians want change. After Lava Jato Ms Ama- 
ral founded Acredito (I believe), a movement that preaches “re- 
newal of people, practices and principles”. She also joined Reno- 
vaBR, a public-policy bootcamp founded by Eduardo Mufarej, a 
businessman, that trained 117 candidates before the 2018 election, 
of whom 17 were elected. Members of RenovaBR represent parties 





across the ideological spectrum and don't always obey party in- 
structions. Ms Amaral was nearly kicked out of the centre-left 
Democratic Labour Party for voting for pension reform. 

“Every politician has to choose whether to work for the inside 
or the outside,” she says. Ms Amaral and two other congressmen 
cut costs by sharing staff. Their “shared cabinet” was the first to 
propose a basic income for the poor during the pandemic. Veteran 
politicians now use social media. “It was as if the public didn’t ex- 
ist and now it does,” says Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a former 
president. The internet may spur more change than the modest re- 
forms agreed on so far, such as a “clean record” law barring candi- 
dates with graft convictions for eight years and a “performance 
clause” denying funds to parties with less than 3% of the vote. 

Deeper reforms might include smaller districts, stricter cam- 
paign-financing rules and admitting independent candidates. But 
none looks likely. Although voters in 2018 elected a record number 
of first-timers, most were “new politicians with old ideas,” says 
Joénia Wapixana, the first indigenous congresswoman. Politi- 
cians back the system that put them in power. That was clear when 
they refused to give up pork in the budget even though it meant 
cuts to health and education. Deputies may even support a bill to 
increase their terms from four to five years and to bring back cor- 
porate campaign donations. 

Mr Bolsonaro’s vows of renewal have also proved false. “In 2018 
it was a decision between something we knew had brought the 
country to its knees and something we didn’t know,” says Mr Mu- 
farej. That was a “collective mistake”. Disillusion increased when 
the president squandered chances to buy vaccines. A Pfizer execu- 
tive told the cpi1 that Mr Bolsonaro ignored six offers from the 
company. His approval rating fell from over 40% in August to less 
than 30%. But Congress has ignored 11 impeachment petitions 
against Mr Bolsonaro. Before Ms Rousseff was impeached, she 
faced months of protests and her support slumped to 9%. 

The cPI will give Mr Bolsonaro’s opponents ammunition for 
the election next year. The battle will be fought by traditional poli- 
ticians. His top rival is Lula, who wants to remind Brazilians how 
good things were when he was president. “Poor people travelled in 
aeroplanes and were proud to eat meat on Sundays,’ he tells The 
Economist. “Now they are going hungry.” Yet Lula’s negative ratings 
are nearly as high as Mr Bolsonaro’s. Many Brazilians have not for- 
given him for the PT’s role in corruption. He suggests that prosecu- 
tors in the United States collaborated with Lava Jato because of “an 
interest in our Petrobras”. He admits that the PT lost in 2018 be- 
cause of “errors we committed”, but says they were economic, not 
ethical. With growth stagnant unemployment soaring, “the role of 
government is to put money on the table,” he says. 

If the election were held today, the most likely outcome would 
be a runoff between Lula and Mr Bolsonaro. Some of Lula’s critics 
would hold their noses and vote for him. “At least the PT is on the 
democratic spectrum,’ says Mr Cardoso, whose Party of Brazilian 
Social Democracy was long its biggest rival. Centrist parties are 
scrambling to find an alternative. “Lula and Bolsonaro see the 
country in the rear-view mirror,’ says Luciano Huck, aTv host who 
may run. Other options include Joao Doria, governor of Sao Paulo, 
and Ciro Gomes, a former governor who came third in 2018. But if 
more than one runs, they could split the centrist vote. 


Trouble ahead? 

If Mr Bolsonaro loses, there may be protests. The ex-foreign min- 
ister called those who disputed Mr Trump’s loss “good citizens”. In 
any bolsonarista uprising, some Brazilian police might join in. As 
for the army, it could split the ranks, says a former officer. That is 
what happened in 1964. The coup against Joao Goulart, a populist 
president, was widely supported by Brazilians hopeful that de- 
mocracy would soon return. The generals ruled for 21 years. 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


SY oJ =Fol F-] a=) oe) gas) e- 94] 





Carlos Alberto Santos Cruz, Mr Bolsonaro’s former chief of 
Staff, insists today’s generals are committed to democracy. Those 
in the cabinet joined as citizens, not soldiers, he says. Still, he ad- 
mits the 6,o00-odd soldiers in government jobs leave the impres- 
sion “that the military is participating.” Many may want Mr Bolso- 
naro to stay, including Eduardo Pazuello, a former health minister 
under scrutiny by the cPI for ignoring pleas from Manaus before 
hospitals ran out of oxygen in January. The army despises the PT 
for its role in corruption and for creating a truth commission to in- 
vestigate human-rights abuses under the dictatorship. In 2018, be- 
fore the supreme court rejected an appeal to save Lula from prison, 
the army commander tweeted that his institution was “on the 
alert” and “shares the desire of all good citizens to repudiate impu- 


nity”. It was perceived by many as a warning. 

Mr Bolsonaro calls the armed forces “my army”. He says he 
could order them to open businesses that governors have shut be- 
cause of the pandemic. The recent resignation of senior com- 
manders suggests they might reject such orders, but Mr Bolsonaro 
is trying to make them more loyal, says Antonio Ramalho, a pro- 
fessor of international relations at the University of Brasilia. Sol- 
diers have had wage increases and been spared the deepest pen- 
sion cuts. In February the president tried unsuccessfully to award 
Mr Pazuello a fourth star. Changing promotion rules so that youn- 
ger officers can advance quickly is a tactic that worked well for Hu- 
go Chavez in Venezuela. “People underestimated Bolsonaro,’ Mr 
Ramalho says. “He’s thinking ahead.” & 


Evangelical churches are political actors in Brazil 


T 4PM EVERY Sunday in Barra de 

Pojuca, a poor town in Bahia, the 
streets suddenly empty. You may think 
people are taking a siesta, until you spot 
the crowded churches. “For every sister 
in church there’s a brother in the bar,’ 
jokes Cremilda, a member of the As- 
semblies of God, as she climbs to the 
cinderblock chapel. But in the 20 years 
since she helped build the church, more 
men are choosing Bibles over beers. 

In1970 only 5% of Brazilians were 
evangelical. Now a third are. The move- 
ment owes its growth to rapid urban- 
isation. Pastors arrived with little more 
than a Bible and preached in words peo- 
ple understood. Pentecostalism offered 
lively worship and solutions to earthly 
problems like poverty, alcohol abuse or 
domestic violence. A study of Brazilian 
men in 2014 found that Protestant faith 
was linked to a rise in earnings, especial- 
ly among less educated black men. “Be- 
coming evangelical isn’t only a bet on the 
supernatural, but a choice’ for a better 
life, writes Juliano Spyer, an anthropol- 
ogist, ina new book. 

The largest subset of evangelicals are 
poor black women, a group Mr Bolsonaro 
has derided. Yet two-thirds of evangeli- 
cals voted for him, many on advice from 
their pastors. Evangelical churches once 
shied away from politics. Their repre- 
sentatives at Brazil's constitutional con- 
vention in 1988 urged Catholics to keep 
the state secular. But they realised poli- 
tics could promote goals such as oppos- 
ing gay rights and abortion, or remaining 
tax-exempt. Politics also became a way to 
deal with religious competition, says 
Amy Erica Smith, a political scientist at 
Iowa State University. The evangelical 
lobby in Congress includes 195 of 513 


federal deputies. 

Among Brazil’s 40-odd denominations, 
the most partisan is the Universal Church 
of the Kingdom of God (UCKG), which has 
2m members and 8,ooo churches. It was 
founded 1n1977 by Edir Macedo, an ex- 
lottery official who owns a Tv network. He 
once backed the PT but in 2018 declared for 
Mr Bolsonaro (who is Catholic but was 
rebaptised in the Jordan river by a Pente- 
costal pastor). Members were bombarded 
with anti-PT propaganda. Some wavered, 
Says Jacqueline Teixeira, an anthropologist 
at the University of Sao Paulo. But after Mr 


ist charlatan”, they felt that if they did not 
vote for Mr Bolsonaro, “they'd be denying 
their religious identity,” she says. 
Evangelical support for Mr Bolsonaro 
reflects dissatisfaction with the PT’s pro- 
gressive policies and its role in Lava Jato. 
“When the church enters politics, it brings 





| Praying for good government 





| morals,’ says Ant6nio Falcao, a Baptist 
| former city councillor from Barra de Poju- 


ca. Mr Bolsonaro has not legalised state 
religious education or outlawed gay mar- 


| riage, but he has increased punishment for 


people convicted of domestic violence and 
Slashed public funding for Brazilian cine- 
ma, Calling it “pornographic”. 

In April his nominee to the supreme 


| court decreed that churches could open on 


Easter Sunday, despite covid-19. Some 500 
people crowded into a UCKG temple in 
Porto Velho. The pastor chided the congre- 


| gation for skipping services. “You have 
Haddad called Mr Macedo a “fundamental- | 


faith in doctors, you have faith in vaccines 
but you don't have faith in God?” he cried. 


| Church workers promptly appeared with 


velvet bags; the UCKG instructs its mem- 
bers to donate 10% of their income to the 
church. “All that matters is that you are 


good with God,” said the pastor. 


Only 35% of evangelicals disapprove of 
Mr Bolsonaro, against 44% of all Brazil- 
ians. Still, some may break with him in 


| 2022. Marina Silva, an evangelical former 


senator, says that politicians should be 
judged for their credentials, not their 


| creed. Assemblies of God is less hier- 
| archical than the uCKG. It has mega- 


churches with bolsonarista pastors but 
most of its 12m members belong to hole- 
in-the-wall congregations like Cremilda’s. 
Pastor Josemar Says he is sick of “repre- 


| sentatives who don't represent us”. 


In 2018 evangelicals were “like chicken 
with our heads cut off”, one of Cremilda’s 


| friends comments. Now she thinks that 


the president is “not aman of God”. But 


| Cremilda is undecided. She is waiting to 


see whether other candidates share her 


Christian values. “Bolsonaro has lost his 
| way,’ she says, but she believes in the 


power of redemption. 


Special report Brazil 


The Economist June 5th 2021 








Time to go 


Brazil's future depends on the outcome of the 2022 election 


HREE MONTHS after Mr Bolsonaro became president, he or- 

dered the army to mark the 55th anniversary of the coup. His 
press office distributed a video in which a man explains that the 
1960s were a “time of fear”. Communists were “killing their com- 
patriots” in the name of a leftist ideology. The public took to the 
streets, begging for intervention. Then “Brazil remembered that it 
had an army.” Black and white shifts to colour as the music picks 
up and Brazil's flag appears. “The army saved us,’ the man Says. 

Brazil's military dictatorship killed 434 people, far fewer than 
regimes in Argentina and Chile did. That partly explains how, after 
handing power back to a civilian government in1985, the army be- 
came the institution Brazilians trust most. It is also why Mr Bolso- 
naro was able to exploit his military past to be elected. 

The generals who joined his government hoped to advance the 
army’s agenda. Instead they hurt its reputation. They were com- 
plicit in Mr Bolsonaro’s mishandling of the pandemic, which led 
to tens of thousands of unnecessary deaths. They failed to get him 
to sign vaccine contracts or to stop him greeting supporters when 
he caught covid-19. Under Mr Pazuello, the health ministry resem- 
bled a boca de fumo (drug den) for hydroxychloroquine. At one 
point it launched an app for doctors that recommended the drug 
to nearly everyone, including infants and people with hangovers. 

Yet the army has so far held Mr Bolsonaro back from an anti- 
democratic “adventure’, in the words of Mr Santos Cruz. How long 
itcan do this is less clear. Mr Bolsonaro may try to cling to power if 
he loses next year by claiming he has won and inciting protests. 
“Only God will remove me,” he has said. He says electronic voting 
is subject to fraud and he has eased gun laws to “arm the people” 


against “dictators”. His fans include police and thugs. The army 
may find it has to choose between democracy and Mr Bolsonaro. 

Other Brazilian institutions have survived his assaults, though 
their resistance can resemble a game of whack-a-mole. In May, 
after police began a defamation investigation into a YouTuber 
who had called Mr Bolsonaro a “genocidaire,’ ajudge threw out the 
case. Another judge quashed a probe into Almir Surui and other 
indigenous leaders accused of “lies” about government failings in 
the pandemic. Folha de S. Paulo, a newspaper, denounced censor- 
ship by printing an op-ed of 185 insulting names for the president, 
including “tyrant”, “butcher” and “donkey”. 

But while the courts have rebuffed Mr Bolsonaro’s authoritar- 
lanism, other institutions have suffered at the hands of his loyal- 
ists. After Congress blocked two decrees to give the agriculture 
ministry control over indigenous land claims, Funai changed its 
policy to allow farmers to claim ownership of tribal lands not yet 
officially demarcated. Police and prosecutors are investigating al- 
lies and sons of the president, but that has cost some their jobs. Mr 
Bolsonaro has named one pliant supreme-court justice and will be 
able to pick another this year. 

If he manages to win re-election (by fair means or foul) he 
could nominate two more. His attacks on democracy would then 
become more brazen. His more radical fans shun institutions and 
see him as their saviour. The bolsonarista who said she wants civil 
war once camped outside Mr Moro’s court. When he quit and ac- 
cused the president of obstructing justice, she replaced her pro- 
Moro T-shirt with one saying, “I would go to war for Bolsonaro”. 

Four more years of him in charge could devastate the Amazon, 
where much of the rainforest could turn into dry savannah. Mr 
Bolsonaro prefers losing a trade deal with the EU to changing his 
environmental policy. That would be bad for the whole country, 
which has been going in the wrong direction for a decade. Growth 
is stuck, jobs are scarce, millions of people are hungry and politi- 
cians think only of themselves. For a country that likes to party, 
there is little to celebrate. 

In 2018 only 14% of Brazilians said they trusted the supreme 
court “a lot” and 3% trusted Congress. Mr Bolsonaro exploited 
such disillusion to win election. His rivals in 2022 must turn it 
against him. Polls suggest Lula would win a runoff. But as vaccina- 
tion and the economy pick up, the president may regain ground. 
Lula must show how his handling of the pandemic has cost lives 
and livelihoods, and how he has ruled for his family not for Brazil. 
The ex-president should offer solutions, not saudades (nostalgia). 

On March 31st, the anniversary of the coup, six potential chal- 
lengers to Mr Bolsonaro signed a manifesto saying democracy was 
“under threat.” Saving it will take more than manifestos. Politi- 
cians need to tackle overdue economic reforms. Courts must crack 
down on corruption. And businesses, NGOs and ordinary Brazil- 
ilans must protest in favour of the Amazon and the constitution. 
But it will be hard to change Brazil’s course so long as Mr Bolsonaro 
is president. The most urgent priority is to vote him out. m 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS A list of acknowledgments and sources is included in the online version 
of this special report 


OFFER TO READERS Reprints of this special report are available, with a minimum order 
of five copies. For academic institutions the minimum order is 50 and for companies 100. 
We also offer a customisation service. To order, contact Foster Printing Service: 

Tel: +1 866 879 9144; email: economist@fosterprinting.com 


For information on reusing the articles featured in this special report, or for copyright queries, 
contact The Economist Rights and Syndication Department: Tel: +44 (0)20 7576 8000; 
email: rights@economist.com 


MORE SPECIAL REPORTS Previous special reports can be found at 
Economist.com/specialreports 


‘Middle East & Africa 


South Africa 


The stench of corruption 


HARRISMITH 


What the ordeal of one municipality says about life under the ruling party 


T TIMES IT can be hard to find the right 
A\metaphot for the dysfunction of the 
South African state. But then, on a recent 
morning, your correspondent found him- 
self in the middle of a broken sewage 
works, knee-deep in excrement. Like the 
other six plants in the municipality of Ma- 
luti-a-Phofung, the one in the town of Har- 
rismith is knackered. And it is not the only 
sign of collapse. The 350,000 people in the 
municipality are regularly without clean 
tap water. Rubbish is rarely collected. Pow- 
er is sporadic. “I feel like crying,’ says Sam 
Twala, a local activist. “Is there any legacy 
we re leaving for our kids?” 

Under Jacob Zuma, South Africa’s for- 
mer president, state-owned enterprises 
were looted on a vast scale. An estimated 
itrn rand ($7obn)—equivalent to nearly 
20% of GDP—was siphoned out of state cof- 
fers. Creaking ports and regular power cuts 
are thought to lower annual growth in sub- 
Saharan Africa’s second-largest economy 
by one percentage point a year. 


Since Cyril Ramaphosa took over as 
president in 2018 he has tried to clamp 
down on graft. In his latest move, on May 
5th, he secured the suspension of his nem- 
esis, Ace Magashule, as secretary-general 
of the ruling African National Congress 
(ANC), after his arrest last year on charges 
of fraud, corruption and money-launder- 
ing. On May 26th Mr Zuma pleaded not 
guilty to charges of fraud, racketeering and 
money-laundering related to an arms deal 
struck in the late 1990s. His trial is now un- 
der way, after many long delays. 

Malfeasance neither started nor ended 
with the Zuma era. And it goes much deep- 


> Also in this section 


42 France's reset in Africa 











43 Congo's terrifying volcano 
44 |sNetanyahu on his way out? 


45 Arow over musical trucks in Jordan 


The Economist June 5th 2021 





er than national institutions. The starkest 
effects of corruption and “cadre deploy- 
ment”, where cronies are given jobs on the 
basis of loyalty rather than merit, are 
found in local government—in places like 
Maluti-a-Phofung. 

After apartheid ended in 1994, three ar- 
eas merged to form Maluti-a-Phofung. The 
first, Harrismith, was a genteel town visit- 
ed by Princess (now Queen) Elizabeth in 
1947. The second was the farming area 
around the town of Kestell, named aftera 
man who helped translate the Bible into 
Afrikaans. The third, and most populous, 
was the Sotho-speaking area of QWaQwa, 
one of ten ethnic “homelands” set up to di- 
vide and rule the black population. 

Running such a diverse area would bea 
challenge for any party. But the ANC, which 
has been in charge since the first local elec- 
tion in 2000, has barely tried. In March 
2018, shortly after Mr Ramaphosa became 
president, the municipality was placed un- 
der administration, as per an emergency 
provision in the constitution. Because of 
fierce opposition led by allies of the then 
mayor, Vusimusi Tshabalala, who says that 
the administrators were appointed be- 
cause of machinations within the ANC, it 
took another year before the outside team 
actually got to work. 

When it did, it found a catastrophe. The 
municipality is insolvent. It hardly bothers 
to collect utility bills; revenues cover just >> 


42 Middle East & Africa The Economist June 5th 2021 


>» 30% of expenditure. It keeps itself afloat them. There is supposed to be a call centre 


with central-government grants and by not 
paying creditors. It owes around 7bn rand, 
mostly to Eskom, the state-run power util- 
ity. In 2018 it granted Eskom the power to 
take money directly from the council's 
bank account, but an appeal is dragging on, 
so the utility cannot implement the order. 

Even while they were under supervi- 
sion, local ANC panjandrums tried to au- 
thorise payments to entities without any 
contracts, according to a report by the ad- 
ministrators. Spending was “unautho- 
rised, irregular, fruitless and wasteful”. 
Bigwigs allegedly complained when they 
were denied flashy cars more expensive 
than rules allowed. In August 2020 the Spe- 
cial Investigating Unit, a national anti-cor- 
ruption body, said it was looking into mu- 
nicipal activities since 2012, the year before 
Mr Tshabalala became mayor. He argues 
that the problems in the municipality pre- 
dated his mayoralty, and have continued 
since he left. “I am prepared to go to any 
court of law to prove my innocence,” he 
Says. (In 2019 the ANC gave this ally of Mr 
Magashule a new plum job: chief whip in 
the provincial parliament.) 

As yet no one has been brought to book. 
In a sign of how the ANC’s internal battles 
at the national level play out as local skir- 
mishes, the government of the Free State 
(the province of which Maluti-a-Phofung 
is part and which is influenced by its ex- 
premier, Mr Magashule) dismissed the ad- 
ministrators in March 2020. It said their 
job was done. Leona Kleynhans of the op- 
position Democratic Alliance (DA) predicts 
a return to “industrial-scale looting”. 

And so life goes on as normal for locals 
such as Thabiso Mofokeng. In the former 
QwaQwa he walks down the hill from his 
Shack, cowbells clanking in the distance. 
He arrives at a pile of rocks. Mr Mofokeng 
lifts the stones and points to a dirty trickle 
from an underground stream. Because 
pipes are broken, it is his village’s only 
source of water. Residents queue with 
buckets from 3am. Though there are water- 
storage tanks, the municipality rarely fills 


ZIMBABWE 
BOTSWANA 





SOUTH AFRICA 


AINOIGWVZOW 


weet, | .. Pretoria 
_ Johannesburg 
ESWATINI 






~Harrismith 


INDIAN 


| 200 km OCEAN 


he can ring to report water problems, but 
despite a contractor having been paid, the 
facility was never built. 

Maluti-a-Phofung is far from unique. 
The Auditor-General, a watchdog, last year 
gave just 8% of municipalities clean au- 
dits, most of them run by the DA. In 67% of 
cases accounts were “not credible enough” 
to use. “Irregular” expenditure reached 
32bn rand in 2018/19, up from 25bn in the 
previous financial year. 

Ahead of local elections in October 
South Africans are fed up. Public satisfac- 
tion with big municipalities is at its lowest 
level since Consulta, a research firm, began 
polling in 2014. Though protests over poor 
services decreased in 2020 because of the 
pandemic, the numbers in 2018 and 2019 
were the highest since 2004, when Munici- 
pal 1Q, a data provider, started counting. 

Some South Africans are taking action. 
In January 2019 Mr Twala and another 
township leader, Willy Tshabalala, visited 
a faulty pump station. There they met Pe- 
trus van Eeden, a burly white farmer. The 
trio decided to fix Harrismith. They set up 
Water Heroes, a grassroots outfit that re- 
paired hundreds of pipes and collected 
rubbish. “We ran the town for a year and it 
was clean,’ says Mr van Eeden. 

Other forms of citizen activism are vis- 
ible as well. In December a court gave tem- 
porary control over sewage works in the 
Kgetlengrivier municipality to a residents’ 
association—a move that has inspired a 
similar group in Harrismith to try to take 
its municipality to court. Many ratepayers’ 
associations are withholding taxes in prot- 
est. “A sea change is under way at local gov- 
ernment level,” argues David Everatt of the 
University of the Witwatersrand. 

Such local groups are often led by 
whites. Afriforum, a pressure group for Af- 
rikaners (South Africans of mostly Dutch 
descent), is backing court cases in places 
like Kgetlengrivier and Harrismith. It also 
has a spin-off infrastructure firm, known 
as Pionier, which it puts forward to run ser- 
vices instead of municipalities. Afriforum 
insists its efforts will help all residents, 
black and white. Yet it is viewed with mis- 
trust by many black South Africans. In 2018 
its CEO Said that apartheid was wrong, but 
not a crime against humanity. Mr van Ee- 
den, himself of Afrikaner stock, is reluc- 
tant to join “a group of white people want- 
ing to take ‘their’ town back”. 

He prefers a model like Water Heroes, 
which bridged racial divisions while also 
fixing pipes. But the organisation was 
treated with scorn by the municipality, 
which accused it of vandalising property 
and forced it to stop. Services soon col- 
lapsed. The hope that gushed in 2020 has 
turned to effluent in 2021. “When I started I 
was optimistic,’ reflects Mr van Eeden. 
“Now I’m demoralised.” @ 





France and Africa 


Atonement 


PARIS 
France asks forgiveness for its past, 
and rethinks its future 


RANCE “MUST look history in the face 
Fan recognise the share of suffering 
that it inflicted on the Rwandan people”. So 
declared President Emmanuel Macron at 
the genocide memorial in Kigali, Rwanda’s 
capital, on May 27th (pictured). “In ignor- 
ing the warnings of the most clear-sighted 
observers,’ he said, “France bore damning 
responsibility in a chain of events that led 
to the worst.” He hoped survivors of the 
genocide might “perhaps forgive” France. 

Mr Macron is the first French president 
to recognise his country’s responsibility in 
the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of 
Rwandans, mostly Tutsis, in 1994. France 
backed and armed the Hutu regime that 
planned and carried out the massacres. 
French leaders long claimed their country 
had “misunderstood” what was going on. 
Rwanda, under Tutsi leadership, cut dip- 
lomatic ties with France in 2006. In his 
speech, Mr Macron disappointed some 
survivors of the genocide by not explicitly 
apologising. But Rwanda’s president, Paul 
Kagame, Said his words were “more power- 
ful than an apology’. 

In Paris Mr Macron’s acknowledgment 
is considered part of an effort to reset poli- 
cy in Africa, using history to reshape cur- 
rent ties. Last year France returned 27 
works of art to Benin and Senegal, after Mr 
Macron promised to start handing back 
artefacts taken under colonial rule. He also 
agreed to end the French treasury-backed 
CFA franc, a west African currency some re- 
gard as a colonial relic (and which is still >» 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


> used). This year historians have published 
two official reports: one, by Benjamin Sto- 
ra, on France’s role in Algeria, the other, by 
Vincent Duclert, on its actions during the 
Rwandan genocide. “History weighs heavi- 
ly on our relationship with Africa,” says 
Herve Berville, a Rwandan-born deputy 
from Mr Macron’s party: “Treating ques- 
tions of history and memoty is indispens- 
able, especially for younger people, if we 
want to build healthier ties.” 

The 992-page Duclert report is damn- 
ing. It concludes that France bore “over- 
whelming responsibility” for not doing 
more to stop the slaughter. Officials, aid 
workers or reporters who queried French 
policy at the time “were met with indiffer- 
ence, rejection or bad faith”. Decision- 
making on Rwanda was centralised at the 
presidency, under Francois Mitterrand. Of- 
ficials dismissed the massacres as a merely 
“tribal” conflict. Behind France’s policy 
was a primordial worry: the “threat of an 
Anglo-Saxon world’, represented by Mr Ka- 
game’s English-speaking Rwandan Patriot- 
ic Front, which was leading an insurgency 
against (and ultimately overthrew) the 
French-speaking Hutu regime. 

Mr Macron’s Africa reset is based on a 
fresh geostrategic calculation. France has 
in the past sought to perpetuate “Franc- 
afrique’, a cosy web of ties with its ex-colo- 
nies. Mr Macron, by contrast, declared in 
2017 that he was from a “generation that 
does not come and tell Africa what to do”. 
Keen to promote broader French economic 
interests, and wary of competition from 
China and Turkey, he has courted non- 
French-speaking leaders. After Rwanda, he 
headed to South Africa to discuss getting 
covid-19 vaccines to the continent, as well 
as more French business. 

There is a tension in this strategy. En- 
gaging with Mr Kagame’s authoritarian re- 
gime, increasingly friendless in the Eng- 
lish-speaking world, is controversial. His- 
tory still underpins the old network, if not 
the new. France Keeps 5,100 soldiers in the 
(heavily French-speaking) Sahel as part of 
Operation Barkhane, a counter-insurgency 
operation. In April it looked like business 
as usual when Mr Macron flew to Chad for 
the funeral of Idriss Déby, the country’s 
strongman ruler for three decades, calling 
him a “loyal friend”. Chad is France’s main 
military partner in Operation Barkhane. 

France’s Sahel policy is under particular 
Strain after the recent ousting of Mali’s 
president and prime minister by Assimi 
Goita, who led a military coup last year as 
well. On June 2nd the African Union sus- 
pended Mali’s membership and threatened 
sanctions if a civilian-led government is 
not restored. Mr Macron, who is due to re- 
view troop levels in the region, has de- 
clared, “We can't stay there for ever.” But 
history suggests that such threats are easi- 
er to issue than to carry out. @ 


Congo 


Middle East & Africa 43 


Mount Nyiragongo’s fury 


SAKE 


Hundreds of thousands of people have fled Goma, fearing lava and deadly gas 


HEY GRABBED Dlankets, clothes and 

mattresses and rushed out of their 
houses at dawn on May 27th. In their tens 
of thousands, they streamed out of the city 
of Goma, in eastern Congo, terrified of 
what its volcano might do next. Some fled 
east towards the border with Rwanda (see 
map). Others hurried west to the Congo- 
lese town of Sake, around 20km away, clog- 
ging the dirt road from Goma with motor- 
bikes, cars and pedestrians. Hundreds of 
people rushed down to Goma’s port to pile 
onto boats heading to Bukavu, a city at the 
southern end of Lake Kivu. 

It was the second mass flight since mol- 
ten lava began spilling out of a fissure in 
the side of Mount Nyiragongo on May 
22nd. Hundreds of thousands of people 
have fled Goma, where lava flattened dis- 
tricts in the northern outskirts but stopped 
short of the centre (and just spared the air- 
port). Some 32 people have been killed and 
around 3,500 houses destroyed. Yet things 
could get much worse. 

On May 27th the acting governor of 
North Kivu, the province that includes Go- 
ma, ordered the immediate evacuation of 
about 600,000 residents in the centre of 
the city (perhaps another 1.5m live in other 
parts of Goma and many of them did not 
wait to be told to leave). Magma had been 
detected underneath the city centre and 
under the vast, deep Lake Kivu. “An erup- 
tion on land or under the lake cannot be 
ruled out, and it could happen very quickly 


Lava and loss 










b: f 
5 km 
, :\ 
CONGO 
Mount f 
Nyiragongo « Road 
North Kivu Vents —@ | 





a Sake 


Lava flows fA ; 
: # 







= RWANDA 
i) Gisenyi 


al 
i 

1] ‘or, 

I *y 


— 


Lake Kivu } 


*May 22nd-June 1st 2021 
Source: UNOSAT 1 : 


and without warning,’ said the governor, 
Constant Ndima. 

Goma has experienced more than 400 
earthquakes since the eruption on May 
22nd. One was big enough to knock downa 
two-storey building. A deep crack has 
opened up in the road next to Goma’s main 
hospital. Residents fear that, if there is an- 
other blast, lava could spurt out of this 
crack, engulfing the city centre. An even 
deadlier risk is the prospect of a limnic 
eruption, triggered by earthquakes and 
volcanic activity. Dissolved carbon dioxide 
would explode from the lake’s deep waters, 
possibly sending a tsunami-like wave over 
the city. Worse, it could form a deadly 
cloud of gas. A vast volume of carbon diox- >> 


44 Middle East & Africa 


»ide could asphyxiate everyone in Goma 
and Gisenyi, a lakeside town in Rwanda, 
just over the border. 

Limnic eruptions are rare but tend to be 
deadly. The last one, in Cameroon in 1986, 
killed more than 1,700 people, some as far 
away as 25km from the lake. If the lava be- 
lieved to be bubbling beneath Lake Kivu 
raised its temperature by more than one 
degree Celsius, there could be an “over- 
turn’, or limnic eruption. The number of 
earthquakes in the area has been decreas- 
ing, but large ones still shake the city. 
“Pressure is still building, there is poten- 
tial for a magma intrusion into the lake,” 
says Adalbert Muhindo, a volcanologist. 
“This could cause a limnic eruption, but it 
could be onasmaller scale.” Dario Tedesco, 
a volcanologist monitoring Nyiragongo, 
has told people in the area to report any- 
thing strange, such as “a discolouration of 
the lake, increasing temperature of the lake 
or bubbling inside the lake”. These, along 
with the smell of rotten eggs given off by 
sulphur dioxide, are warning Signs. 

The eruption on May 22nd took the resi- 
dents of Goma by surprise. This might, in 
part, have had something to do with the 
fact that the city’s volcano observatory has 
barely received any money since October 
2020, when the World Bank’s funding cycle 
ended. The bank decided not to cough up 
again when it emerged that many of the 
employees on the observatory’s payroll 
were not actually working there. Since the 
funding stopped, lots of the staff who real- 
ly do monitor the volcano have also not 
been paid; some have stopped turning up. 


Magma or militants 

For some who have fled Goma, it was not 
the first time. Clashing rebel groups have 
terrorised eastern Congo for over 25 years. 
In total, around 5m Congolese are dis- 
placed, mostly because of conflict. Many of 
Goma’s residents escaped from nearby vil- 
lages that are preyed on by men with guns. 
They are used to grabbing a handful of pos- 
sessions and rushing out into the night. 

In Sake food is scarce and life is grim. 
“Conditions here are terrible but I am 
frightened to go back,’ says Ange Rusangi- 
Za, whose house was destroyed. She has 
been sleeping on the floor of an unfinished 
building. According to UNICEF, ten sus- 
pected cases of cholera have been recorded 
in Sake, prompting fears of an outbreak. 

Many of Goma’s residents have stayed 
put, hoping for the best. “Yes, if the lake ex- 
plodes, I will die, but I don’t think it will,” 
says Eddygar Shombo. He lived through an 
eruption of Mount Nyiragongo in 2002, 
when lava engulfed swathes of the city. 
Scores of people were killed and more than 
120,000 were left homeless. But, like many 
others, Mr Shombo fears that if he flees, his 
home will be looted. “I have everything 
here, Icannot leave,’ he says. & 


Israel 


Almost there 


JERUSALEM 


The Economist June 5th 2021 





Binyamin Netanyahu’s opponents reach a deal to replace him 


AFTALI BENNETT, the tech millionaire 

turned politician who is poised to be- 
come Israel’s next prime minister, began 
his political career in 2006 as chief of staff 
to Binyamin Netanyahu, then the leader of 
the opposition. Mr Bennett (pictured) ad- 
mired Mr Netanyahu for years and playeda 
key role in his return to power in 2009. Mr 
Bennett's memoir begins with a note of 
gratitude to his former boss, and ends with 
an adulatory chapter entitled “What I 
learned from Binyamin Netanyahu”. 

How times have changed. Mr Bennett's 
Yamina party is now part of a coalition that 
is on the verge of ending Mr Netanyahu’s 
12-year reign aS prime minister. The co- 
alition deal, featuring eight parties holding 
61 seats (see chart), was finalised just be- 
fore a midnight deadline on June 2nd. But 
the potential new government still must 
win aconfidence vote in the 120-seat Knes- 
set (Israel’s parliament) in the coming 
days. Mr Netanyahu will undoubtedly do 
everything in his power to prevent that 
from happening. 

It is no wonder that the negotiations 


aS 
Numbers game 


Israel's Knesset, number of seats by party, March 2021 election result 


Anti-Netanyahu Blue and 


bloc (61) White Labour Meretz 


Yamina 
(6+1) 


re EO 


came down to the wire. Israel is used to 
governments made up of disparate parties, 
but this one would be the most diverse in 
history. On the right are Mr Bennett’s Yami- 
na, along with two other nationalist par- 
ties (Yisrael Beiteinu and New Hope) 
which are also led by former aides to Mr 
Netanyahu (Avigdor Lieberman and Gide- 
on Sa’ar). In the centre is the coalition’s 
largest party, Yesh Atid, led by Yair Lapid, a 
secularist. He is the architect of the new 
government. Under the deal, he would take 
over from Mr Bennett as prime minister if 
the government lasts more than two years. 

There are other centrist and left-wing 
parties in the coalition, but what makes it 
historic is the inclusion of Ra’am, which 
has four seats. It would become the first 
truly independent Arab party to join a gov- 
ernment since Israel’s founding in 1948. 
For decades the Arab parties have been 
shunned and, in turn, have shown little in- 
terest in joining a coalition. Ra’am will not 
hold any cabinet seats. But its leader, Man- 
sour Abbas, used the party’s leverage as a 
potential kingmaker to obtain greater re- >> 


® Potential new government 


Pro-Netanyahu 
bloc (53) 


Religious 
Zionism Shas 





Yisrael New Raiam Joint List | United Torah Judaism 
Sources: Haaretz.com; Beiteinu Hope (uncommitted) 
The Economist Majority 61 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


» sources for Israel’s Arab minority. 

It took the parties opposed to Mr Netan- 
yahu time to get their act together. In three 
of the four elections since 2019 they wona 
majority of seats, but they failed to join up 
before now. Weeks of nerve-racking nego- 
tiations over who would get which cabinet 
posts preceded the current agreement. At 
one point Mr Bennett abandoned the talks, 
reportedly citing the conflict in Gaza and 
Arab-Jewish clashes on the streets of Israe- 
li cities last month. But his negotiations 
with the prime minister bore no fruit. “The 
elections have proven there is no right- 
wing government under Netanyahu,” said 
Mr Bennett on May 30th. “There’s unity or 
fifth elections.” 

In order to lead the new government ef- 
fectively Mr Bennett will have to suppress 
some of his more right-wing views. In the 
past he has opposed the creation of a Pales- 
tinian state and favoured annexing much 
of the occupied West Bank. He is an ardent 
supporter of settlers, once leading the 
council representing them (though he is 
not a settler himself). Some regard him as 
more right-wing than Mr Netanyahu, 
though not nearly as ruthless. He is also an 
observant Jew: if sworn in, he would be the 
first prime minister to wear a yarmulke, or 
Jewish skullcap, for everyday affairs. 

But Mr Bennett notes that he is not the 
only coalition member with what some 
consider extreme views. “For the new gov- 
ernment to succeed, all the partners will 
need to exercise restraint,” he has said. “No 
one will be asked to give up on their ideol- 
ogy, but everyone will have to postpone the 
realisation of some of their dreams. We 
will focus on what can be done, instead of 
arguing over what is impossible.” 

Perhaps the coalition can take some in- 
Spiration from the Knesset’s election of a 
new president of Israel on June 2nd. Law- 
makers voted overwhelmingly for Isaac 
Herzog, a former leader of the Labour party 
and government minister. The president’s 
role is mostly symbolic. Still, it was a rare 
display of consensus for the divided body. 


Bibi’s last stand 
Mustering a majority is a big achievement 
for the opposition. But itis not over the fin- 
ish line yet. The parties reportedly discuss- 
ed a range of issues during their negotia- 
tions, from committee posts to legalising 
cannabis. Some reports suggested that 
there were still details to be hashed out. 
Then there is the confidence vote, which 
could take place as early as June 7th—or the 
speaker of the Knesset, a Netanyahu loyal- 
ist, could try to delay it by an extra week. 
In that time Mr Netanyahu will try to 
pick off wavering members of the coalition 
in order to deny it a majority. They are al- 
ready coming under pressure. Members of 
Mr Bennett’s party have been called “trai- 
tors” by the prime minister's allies. Prot- 


ests have been held outside their homes. 
Senior rabbis have phoned them to warn of 
the spiritual dangers that the new govern- 
ment poses to the Jewish people. 

Mr Netanyahu is also doing his part. In 
a televised tantrum on May 3oth, he ac- 
cused Mr Bennett of carrying out “the fraud 
of the century” and compared the new co- 
alition to Bashar Assad’s regime in Syria 
and to the rulers of Iran. “Don't form a left- 
wing government—such a government isa 
danger to Israel's security and future,” said 
Mr Netanyahu. 

Such intimidation has worked in the 


Middle East & Africa 


past, and one member of Mr Bennett's par- 
ty has already defected to the prime minis- 
ter’s side. But Mr Netanyahu’s act is getting 
old. Mr Bennett has accused him of “trying 
to take the entire state of Israel with him to 
his personal Masada”—a reference to the 
hilltop fortress where Jewish rebels com- 
mitted mass suicide 1,900 years ago, rather 
than be captured by Roman soldiers. He 
and others on the right turned on Mr Net- 
anyahu not because they disagree with his 
hardline policies, but, as Mr Bennett ex- 
plained, “because no one believed [his] 
promises would be kept”. @ 


A jingle makes nerves jangle 


AMMAN 
Should gas-truck drivers be allowed to play Beethoven at dawn? 


VERY DAY Many groggy Jordanians are 

woken by the sound of Beethoven 
blasted down the street. Trucks selling 
gas cylinders drive around playing a 
tinny electronic version of “Fur Elise” in 
the early hours of the morning, alerting 
customers in the style of an ice-cream 
van. Residents in need of gas flag down 
the van when they hear the sound. Some 
consider the gas-truck music a part of 
Jordanian life’s rich soundtrack. Others 
think it is noise pollution. 

Until the late 1990s gas-truck drivers 
alerted their customers by loudly honk- 
ing or clanging keys against the cylin- 
ders. After complaints about the noise, 
the government and the fuel syndicate 
agreed to replace the honking with “a 
relaxing kind of music’, says Hussein 
Allaboun, head of the Energy and Miner- 
als Regulatory Commission. 


nthe i il Tf sad. fom | 


— 





Road to joy 


In April the commission asked Jorda- 
nians how they felt about it. Out of some 
10,000 respondents, 27% said they would 
prefer to phone the gas company and 
arrange a delivery; 53% said they would 
like to order through a smartphone app 
(though one doesn't yet exist); only 20% 
liked the current system. 

The gas-truck music is “the second 
biggest melody after the call to prayer’, 
says Johnny Amore, an artist who got the 
tune changed temporarily (to something 
more Jordanian-sounding) in 2009 un- 
der an EU-funded project. The sound 
sometimes irritates Ali Hassan al-Beer, a 
bookseller. Still, he believes it is a beauti- 
ful symbol, now part of tradition. When 
the music plays, “the kids come out onto 
the streets and yell ‘Gas! Gas!’,” he says. 

“It became part of our daily routine.” 

Others disagree. “It’s nota symbol. It’s 
not a flag,’ says Muhammad Habib, who 
Sells nuts. “It’s just a work mechanism.” 
Waleed Sharqawi, a menswear salesman, 
thinks it “so annoying”. Musical trucks 
cannot be deemed traditional, he says, 
since the practice is only a couple of 
decades old. He knows people who hate 
itso much they get “tensed up and pretty 
aggressive’ when they hear it. Besides, 
the trucks are an unwelcome alarm clock 
for children and the sick, who would 
rather not be woken at 6am when the 
trucks start running. 

Mr Allaboun says the music is not the 
only complaint about the current sys- 
tem. Customers have no recourse if given 
a faulty cylinder because they usually 
cannot remember who sold it to them. 
Some people are not fast enough to flag 
down the trucks before they drive away. 
“If you're like me, an old man, it will take 
you acentury to get there,” says Mr Alla- 
boun. Luckily for him, his trusted door- 
man takes care of it. 


45 


The Economist June 5th 2021 








Covid-19 in Europe 


Hot shots 


PARIS 


Europe’s vaccination campaign has gathered pace, though not everywhere 


PRING SHOWERS and outdoor dining are 
S; clammy combination. But busy cafe 
terraces in Paris and beyond suggest that, 
after months of home cooking, many Euro- 
peans are ready to put up with a little dis- 
comfort to get out of the kitchen. For now 
only al fresco service is allowed across 
much of the EU, sometimes paired with 
curfews. The prospect of a return to nor- 
mality in the months ahead must suffice to 
warm diners’ spirits during cloudbursts. 

It may be a mild annoyance to those 
huddled under improvised awnings to 
think of Americans and Britons mostly 
feasting indoors these days. That main- 
land Europe is several weeks behind in re- 
opening restaurants (and the economy 
more generally) is largely caused by the 
botched start of its vaccination drive. Now 
the jabbing has gained speed. Normality 
feels within sight. Tourist hotspots think 
they can avoid a rerun of the difficult sum- 
mer of 2020; economists are busy upgrad- 
ing growth forecasts. But not everywhere is 
feeling the benefits of vaccines yet. 


EU citizens are still far less protected 
than their American and British counter- 
parts. Just 47% of adults have received 
their first jab, compared with 67% in Amer- 
ica and 75% in Britain. (The figures for sec- 
ond jabs are 22%, 54% and 49%.) A lack of 
doses at the start of the year meant the EU's 
pace of vaccination was about six weeks 
behind America’s and ten weeks behind 
Britain’s. At last, however, supply bottle- 
necks in Europe have eased. 

The steady ramp-up of vaccinations in 
the EU, paired with a drop-off in America, 
means the two will converge soon enough 
(see chart 1). Europe wants 70% of its adult 
population fully vaccinated by summer, 
whereas America has set a target of 64% by 
July 4th. A few things need to go right for 
Europe to reach its goal, but the prospect of 
overtaking America in the second half of 
the year is not far-fetched. 

The ramp-up in vaccinations is good 
news for diners—and the European Com- 
mission. The EU’s executive arm in Brus- 
sels was hurriedly put in charge of procur- 


> Also in this section 
47 Saxony-Anhalt votes 
48 Oneroof, three faiths 
48 Amafioso goes free 
49 Aninterview with Ukraine's president 


50 Charlemagne: Small states under fire 


ing vaccines for the bloc’s 445m citizens 
last year. Its purchases arrived more slowly 
than those of America and Britain, which 
had ensured speedy access to jabs by help- 
ing to fund the vaccines’ development and 
signing early contracts with drug firms. 

In particular, shortfalls in deliveries by 
AstraZeneca, purveyor of a cheap vaccine, 
slowed vaccination. Partly as a result, at 
the height of the crisis Europe brought in 
export controls to divert supplies to its 
own citizens. That jarred with its desire to 
be seen as an open economy helping the 
world to face the pandemic. But efforts by 
Eurocrats to get more doses have paid off. 
Europe is now receiving roughly as much 
vaccine per inhabitant as America. Thierry 
Breton, the European commissioner put in 
charge of turbocharging deliveries, says 
the EU will be able to make 3bn doses of 
vaccines a year by the end of 2021. 


More jabs, more jobs 
The joint procurement plan was meant to 
ensure that all EU citizens got vaccinated at 
roughly the same speed. Having each Euro- 
pean country go it alone would have result- 
ed in some places with vastly higher vacci- 
nation rates than others. This would un- 
dermine Europe’s unity in the face of a cri- 
Sis, and make open borders, for everything 
from goods to tourists, untenable. 

Yet months into the vaccination drive 
the overall EU figure masks a worrying 
range of outcomes (See chart 2). Malta, the >> 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


a) 

Catching up fast 

Daily covid-19 vaccination doses administered 
Per 100,000 adults, seven-day moving average 


1,500 


United States 


1,200 
900 


600 





European Union 300 


0 





Jan Feb Mar Apr May 
2021 
Source: Our World in Data 


» member state with the smallest popula- 
tion, is near Israeli (ie, world-beating) lev- 
els of inoculation. At the other end of the 
scale, Bulgaria is lagging badly behind. The 
poorest member state has put 24 needles 
in arms for every 100 adults, a third of the 
EU average. Most of the laggards are in the 
poorer east of the bloc. 

That EU citizens would end up vaccinat- 
ed in lockstep depended on two assump- 
tions. The first was that each country 
would get the same number of doses rela- 
tive to population. The second was that na- 
tional governments would prove roughly 
as adept at converting doses delivered into 
arms injected. Neither is true. 

On deliveries, some countries have had 
to make do with less vaccine than their 
neighbours. The Eu scheme works by giv- 
ing countries an option to buy a set num- 
ber of doses of various approved vaccines. 
Many poorer countries last year plumped 
for relatively more AstraZeneca, which was 
cheaper and easier to handle. In contrast, 
the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna jabs 
were often favoured by richer countries. 
(Hungary, whose prime minister, Viktor 
Orban, is always keen to needle the Eu, 
took delivery of Chinese and Russian jabs 
which are not approved at the European 
level.) So the AstraZeneca shortfall has af- 
fected some members, such as Bulgaria, 


=e 

Mixed bag 

EU, covid-19 vaccination doses administered 
Per 100 adults, cumulative 










150 
120 
Hungary 
» 60 
| Latvia 30 
- a Bulgaria 0 
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun 
2021 


Sources: Our World in Data; The Economist 


more than others. The Eu has tried to recti- 
fy this, notably by agreeing to send some of 
its spare Pfizer doses to the countries that 
are most deprived. 

To make matters worse, not everyone is 
keen on the AstraZeneca jab. Reports of 
rare but potentially fatal blood clots have 
limited its use in Some EU countries. Even 
though Britain has administered it to mil- 
lions, America has yet to approve it. And 
Europe has pointedly failed to order any 
more of it, in part because relations with 
the company have soured. 

As a result there are growing stockpiles 
of AstraZeneca doses in the EU’s fridges. 
Only three-quarters of the 54m doses deli- 
vered have been administered, compared 
with 95% of Pfizer’s serum. Romania has 
used barely a third of its AstraZeneca 
stocks; Bulgaria less than half. Part of the 
reason France has fallen behind Germany 
in its vaccination rate is because of 3m un- 
used shots of le AstraZeneca. 

Other factors have held back vaccina- 
tion, particularly in some eastern Euro- 
pean countries. Many of their citizens live 
in richer parts of the EU and may have been 
jabbed there, skewing their home coun- 
tries’ national tallies. Minorities, forexam- 
ple the Roma in Romania or Hungary, seem 
harder to reach. Health systems were often 
struggling before the pandemic. There has 
been plenty of disinformation on the safe- 
ty of inoculations. And good old adminis- 
trative incompetence has all too often 
slowed things down. 

Fortunately, vaccine scepticism seems 
to be less common than once feared. Euro- 
peans have flocked to be inoculated at 
higher rates than opinion polls suggested 
they would. That said, the proportion of 
Europeans who have been vaccinated is 
now reaching the level at which the pace of 
injections began to slow in America. 

Europe is trying to paint its slow start as 
a sign of virtue. By allowing more exports 
of vaccines, in contrast to America, it 
looked after some people in poorer coun- 
tries. But it has faced flak for resisting an 
American-led campaign to loosen intellec- 
tual-property rules around vaccines. A 
Startling order for a further 900m-1.8bn 
doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech jab signed 
last month suggests the Eu will have plenty 
to give away in years to come. 

Covid-19 cases have fallen across the EU 
as they did at the same time last year. That 
is probably thanks to a mix of warmer 
weather (notwithstanding the odd shower) 
and vaccines, though the EU is watching 
the spread across Britain of a new variant, 
first spotted in India, with concern. A sys- 
tem of “covid passports” allowing people 
to travel across European borders if they 
have been tested or jabbed is being set up. 
After soggy dinners, it may be the prospect 
of a sunny beach that gets people to the 
vaccination centre. 


Europe 47 


German politics 


Deny the 
Alternative 


MAGDEBURG 
The Christian Democrats still struggle 
against far-right populism in the east 


HE SMALL east German State of Saxony- 

Anhalt is run by a so-called “Kenya” co- 
alition, comprising three parties whose 
colours match that country’s flag: the con- 
servative Christian Democrats (CDU), the 
Social Democrats and the Greens. But so 
bad is the infighting it should be named 
after the similar hues of Afghanistan’s flag, 
chuckles Oliver Kirchner, local head of the 
hard-right Alternative for Germany (AfD). 

He should know. Five years ago the 
Afp—an extremist outfit shunned by all 
other parties—won a quarter of the vote, 
forcing the Kenya trio into their ill- 
matched arrangement. The Afp’s enduring 
support could oblige them to keep it going 
after Saxony-Anhalt’s election on June 6th. 

Parts of this state offer a grimly familiar 
east German tale of deindustrialisation, 
depopulation and resentment of know-it- 
all Wessis (westerners). The AfD’s strength 
in such places gives the cDU, which leads 
the federal government, a persistent head- 
ache. The weird coalitions it dictates are 
bad enough: Saxony-Anhalt’s government 
has often teetered on the verge of break- 
down. In Brandenburg and Saxony the 
Afp’s muscle has forced the cpu into simi- 
lar awkward contraptions. 

But many in the CDU, in Saxony-Anhalt 
and other eastern states, also bitterly re- 
sent the cordon sanitaire their leaders have 
erected around the Afb. Perhaps a third of 
the CDU’s MPs in Saxony-Anhalt would 
prefer to work with the populists, reckons 
Wolfgang Renzsch, professor emeritus at 
the University of Magdeburg. Many regu- 
larly flirt with Afp policies, most recently >> 








= DENMARK 
Schleswig- | 
Holstein _ Mecklenburg- 
\ West Pomerania 
Cs 
Bremen-] Hamburg™ 
_ POLAND 
Lower Saxony y- Berlin 
rae : Brandenburg 
North Rhine- , 
Westphalia 
GER MjA Saxony 
Thuringia 
BEL: Hesse ti 
bat ba Former boundary CZECH 
between East & REPUBLIC 
Saarland West Germany 
Bavaria 
FRANCE Baden- 
Wurttemberg AUSTRIA 
SWITZ. a 


48 Europe 


>» in December during a row over Tv-licence 
fees that nearly toppled the government. 
(That episode, like others before it, was de- 
fused by Reiner Haseloff, the wily CDU pre- 
mier.) Concerned CDU members have cir- 
culated a letter to colleagues urging them 
to hold the line against the afb. 

Eastern states are small, but their dra- 
mas still resonate. Last year in Thuringia 
the local arm of the cpu backed a premier 
also supported by the afp. The furore fin- 
ished off Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, at 
the time the CDU’s national leader and An- 
gela Merkel’s heir apparent. Her successor, 
Armin Laschet, takes a robust stance 
against the Afp. This message is likely to 
carry Mr Haseloff to a narrow victory over 
the Afp, giving Mr Laschet a tailwind for 
September's federal election. Yet he faces a 
dilemma: the CDU’s main rival in the west 
is the Green party, but in the east it is the 
Afp. This pair are poles apart. CDU wallahs 
admit that this makes it hard to find a con- 


sistent national message. 

One idea is simply to write off a chunk 
of the eastern vote. Last week Marco Wan- 
derwitz, the government’s commissioner 
for eastern Germany, revived an old debate 
by claiming that some of the electorate 
there had been “socialised by dictatorship” 
and did not understand democracy. Other 
parties, he said, should leave them to the 
AfD and await a new generation. 

Yet 30 years after German reunification, 
the afp’s strength suggests it cannot just be 
waited out. In the east it is more popular 
among younger voters than older ones. 
And it always manages to find a popular 
theme, sighs Sven Schulze, the cDu’s chair 
in Saxony-Anhalt: ten years ago it was the 
euro; five years ago refugees; now covid-19. 
(Mr Kirchner has vowed to launch investi- 
gations into what he argues was an exces- 
sive lockdown.) The cpu leadership is de- 
termined to lock out the AfD. But it still has 
no remedy for its eastern headache. @ 


One roof, three faiths 


BERLIN 
A new place of worship for Christians, Jews and Muslims 


T IS USUALLY bad news when multiple 
I religions claim the same place of wor- 
ship. It can lead to conflict, as illustrated 
by the recent violence at Jerusalem's 
holiest site. Or it can be a sign that flocks 
are dwindling, forcing congregations to 
share space. But Berlin’s House of One 
intentionally puts achurch, mosque and 
synagogue under a single roof. 

The cornerstone of the €47m ($57m) 
place of worship was laid last week near 
Alexanderplatz. In four years’ time, it 
will be a structure housing three separate 
prayer rooms and a 46m-high domed hall 
for the faiths to mix. “We are building the 
House to make a statement,’ says Rabbi 
Andreas Nachama, one of the project’s 
leaders. 

The idea has been in the works fora 
decade, since local leaders from the three 
Abrahamic religions came together to 
think up a plan fora religiously signif- 
icant spot: the former site of one of Ber- 
lin’s oldest churches. 

An interfaith project made more 
sense than another church, says Father 
Gregor Hohberg, a Protestant pastor 
whose congregation once worshipped at 
the site. “In Berlin we have a lot of very 
wonderful churches,” he points out. “And 
all of these churches are not full of peo- 
ple on Sunday mornings.” Berlin, after 
all, is better known for sex clubs and 
party drugs than piety. Still, another 120 
people have already joined Father Hoh- 
berg’s congregation, years in advance. 


| A ground-breaking moment 


Supporters can also sponsor bricks for 
€10 each. 

An ecumenical mega-sanctuary 
comes with disagreements. In the syna- 
gogue, Orthodox Jews insisted on sep- 
arate seating for men and women. In the 
church, the big debate was whether the 
altar should face east or west. 

Even before the doors have opened, 
the House of One is yielding revelations. 
Archaeologists have discovered around 
4,000 Skeletons at the site, dating back to 
the middle of the 12th century, suggest- 
ing Berlin is a century older than previ- 
ously thought. 






- =» 


saenene 
“_ 


oS. 


= - 4 F 
stom = 
_ # «= 
F - — 2 
= 4 7 - = 
| ae “> fae 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Italy and the Mafia 
The price of 
success 


ROME 
A depraved Mafia enforcer goes free, 
thanks to a victim’s reforms 


HORTLY AFTER nine o'clock ona Monday 

night, Giovanni Brusca, his brother, 
their wives and children had abruptly to 
abandon their roast-chicken dinner. 
Armed, masked police burst into their 
rented villa and arrested both men. 

That was in 1996. On May 31st Mr Brusca 
left prison in Rome, a free man after serv- 
ing 25 years of a 30-year sentence imposed 
for, among many murders, that in 1992 of 
Italy’s most renowned anti-Mafia prosecu- 
tor, Giovanni Falcone. Few recent events 
have stirred greater revulsion than the re- 
lease of this former Mafia boss, nicknamed 
u Verru, (the Pig) in Sicilian. “This is not the 
justice Italy deserves,” railed Matteo Salvi- 
ni, the leader of the populist Northern 
League. 

The emotional reaction was surely 
understandable. Mr Brusca was a leading 
associate of the late capo dei capi, the boss 
of bosses—namely the psychopathic Salva- 
tore “Toto” Riina. In the early 1990s Riina 
launched a terrorist campaign against the 
Italian state that involved lethal bombings 
in several mainland cities, the assassina- 
tion of Falcone and the later killing of Fal- 
cone’s colleague, Paolo Borsellino. It was 
Mr Brusca who detonated the bomb that 
killed Falcone, his wife and bodyguards. 
And when one of the other members of the 
hit squad, Santino Di Matteo, was arrested 
and turned state’s evidence, it was Mr Brus- 
ca who conspired to silence him by kid- 
napping his 12-year-old son. After holding 
him captive for more than two years, he 
had the boy strangled and his body dis- 
solved in acid. 

Ironically, Mr Brusca himself turned 
State’s evidence after his own arrest. After 
initially misleading interrogators, he be- 
gan giving them valuable intelligence on 
the Sicilian Mafia, better known as Cosa 
Nostra. His co-operation let him escape a 
life sentence because of a law sponsored, 
just as ironically, by Falcone. That law has 
helped police and prosecutors turn several 
other top Mafiosi and helped steadily to 
weaken the Mafia over the past 25 years. 
Cosa Nostra is now less powerful than ei- 
ther the Calabrian 'Ndrangheta or the Nea- 
politan Camorra. 

Falcone’s sister, Maria, has said she is 
saddened by Mr Brusca’s release. But, she 
added, “That is the law—and a law that my 
brother wanted—so it must be respected.” 
Her brother, one suspects, would have 
been proud of her. 


The Economist June 5th 2021 





An interview with Ukraine's president 


The comedian gets serious 


KYIV 


Volodymyr Zelensky is clobbering oligarchs but ducking institutional reform 


(477STILL DON’T feel comfortable here,” 

[says Volodymyr Zelensky, the presi- 
dent of Ukraine, as he walks briskly into an 
opulent presidential meeting room. A for- 
mer comedian inahitTv series, “Servant of 
the People’, that tells the story of ahumble 
schoolteacher who accidentally becomes 
president, he is still, it seems, more used to 
a studio than a palace. 

But two years ago his chutzpah, and the 
failures of his predecessors, won him near- 
ly 75% of the vote in the runoff round ofa 
presidential election. In a country where 
politics has long been dominated by oli- 
garchs and treated as a means for personal 
gain, the victory of aman whose only asset 
was his popularity seemed a miracle. “Peo- 
ple saw a Cinderella story and identified 
themselves with the life behind the 
screen,’ Mr Zelensky tells The Economist. 

He promised to overhaul the political 
system. “I have been impetuous in my 
drive for change, but I am not the kind of 
person who starts off with an exit strategy,” 
he says. For all his good intentions, how- 
ever, he came into office lacking political 
experience or even a coherent plan. His 
presidency has been eventful, but reform 
has been slow and the results are mixed. 

On the positive side, worries that Mr Ze- 
lensky would be manipulated by oligarchs 
such as Ihor Kolomoisky, who financed the 
TV channel on which Mr Zelensky ap- 
peared, and who is under investigation in 
America, have not been borne out. Neither 
have the fears that Mr Zelensky would be 
pushed around by Russia. He has stuck to 


his red lines when negotiating over the fu- 
ture of Donbas, the south-eastern region of 
Ukraine that was plunged into war in 2014 
by Russia-backed separatists; and he held 
his nerve when Moscow massed troops on 
his border a few weeks ago. 

He showed guts when he took on Viktor 
Medvedchuk, a powerful oligarch and a 
friend of Mr Putin. Mr Medvedchuk, whose 
TV channels peddled pro-Kremlin propa- 
ganda while the pipeline he controlled 
pumped Russian diesel into Ukraine, is 
now under house arrest, charged with trea- 
son. His Tv channels have been shut down 
and his assets have been frozen. (Mr Med- 
vedchuk, who also leads the most popular 
opposition party, denies any wrongdoing.) 
Vladimir Putin, who is said to be a god- 
father to Mr Medvedchuk’s daughter, has 
promised to respond “promptly and prop- 
erly’ to the arrest. 


On the other hand... 
Yet although the worst expectations of Mr 
Zelensky have not come to pass, nor have 
the hopes that he would bring in a effective 
team of reformers. Although Mr Zelensky’s 
government has pushed through a law es- 
tablishing a market in farmland, the coun- 
try’s justice system remains unreformed 
and the rule of law is as patchy as ever. 
Marking the second anniversary of the 
president’s inauguration, Novoe Vremya, a 
weekly, summed up the sentiment in a 
headline: “Not as bad as we thought...but 
still quite bad.” 

Having fired an opening shot against 


Europe 49 


Mr Medvedchuk, Mr Zelensky has now 
pitched a new anti-oligarch law. He wants 
to create a legal definition: that an oligarch 
is someone who controls a big business, fi- 
nances a political party and controls sig- 
nificant media channels. He wants to 
create a register of oligarchs that will, he 
hopes, make them toxic to investors and 
drive down the value of their assets if they 
refuse to change their ways. 

Most Ukrainians would agree that their 
country’s oligarchs are too powerful. They 
have typically used their wealth to capture 
the state, arranging deals involving the 
country’s resources that benefit them not 
the taxpayer. However, Mr Zelensky’s crit- 
ics worry that he is simply trying to clobber 
individual tycoons into submission and 
grab their media assets, rather than open- 
ing up the economy to genuine competi- 
tion. A leaked draft of the new law suggests 
it will not grant greater powers to the anti- 
monopoly body or require oligarchs to re- 
duce their market dominance. Yet it bars 
anyone worth more than $80m from own- 
ing media assets. Meanwhile, he says, the 
State needs its own Tv channel. 

Mr Zelensky has no obvious rivals for 
now, and seems to like it that way; he is, 
some say, driven more by vanity than by 
greed. He is trying to knock out another ce- 
lebrity-turned-politician: Vitaly Klitschko, 
a former world heavyweight boxing cham- 
pion who is now the elected mayor of Kyiv. 
Mr Zelensky has accused his office of cor- 
ruption and dispatched law enforcers to 
conduct dozens of searches. Mr Klitschko 
says he is still on his feet. “I am an inde- 
pendent political player with a success re- 
cord. Iam building up my party ahead of 
the next parliamentary elections,’ he says. 

Some of Mr Zelensky’s critics detect a 
whiff of authoritarianism in his actions. 
Yet Ukraine is not Russia, and attempts to 
grab too much power there rarely succeed. 
Faced with a threat, Ukraine’s oligarchs 
may work together to ensure that Mr Ze- 
lensky never gets comfortable in the presi- 
dential office. But that is not necessarily 
good news for a country that desperately 
needs reform. 

Mr Zelensky has turned his presidency 
into a quest: he has broken into a closed 
political system and stuck up for ordinary 
people. They have cheered him on. His at- 
tack on the oligarchs is popular, as is his 
defiance of Russia and his government’s 
big investment in new roads. He is still, by 
far, the most trusted politician in Ukraine: 
30% say they would vote for him today, the 
Same number that did in the first round of 
voting two years ago. With the summer 
coming, despite covid-19 and the continu- 
ing war in the east, there is a feel-good 
atmosphere in Kyiv. “People are still in love 
with Zelensky—or rather with his charac- 
ter,’ says Yulia Mostovaya, the editor of 
Zerkalo Nedeli, an online newspaper. @ 


50 Europe 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Charlemagne | Tiny but less mighty 


The era of small-state privilege is coming to an end 





« NE PERSON, One vote” is a good principle. The ratio in the 

European Union is a bit more complex: “One Luxembourg- 
er, Or nine Germans, one vote.” Germany has one MEP for every 
860,000 citizens. By contrast Luxembourg—a country roughly the 
size of Dusseldorf—has one per 100,000. 

A disproportionate parliamentary weighting is one of many 
perks enjoyed by the Eu’s gang of small states. Three-quarters of 
the bloc’s population live in just seven countries; the remainder is 
Spread over the other 20. For them, membership is a sweet deal. 
Their politicians can wangle top jobs, usually as compromise can- 
didates. Acommon currency gives smaller European economies a 
Say in monetary matters, rather than being thrown around like a 
ragdoll by the Bundesbank, as they were before the euro. When it 
comes to topics such as tax, foreign policy, or changing the Eu’s 
treaties, they wield vetoes. This means Malta (population: 
500,000) can have as much Say as Italy (population: 60m) when 
Shaping a club of 450m. The Eu acts as a geopolitical magnifying 
glass, making small countries appear much larger. 

Within the Eu, small states can, for once, shape history rather 
than be victims of it. In times of crisis, leaders used to running a 
country with a GDP equivalent to the turnover of a middling s&P 
500 company sit round the table with Angela Merkel and Emman- 
uel Macron, ostensibly as equals. It is little wonder that at their 
first such meeting, some leaders have the giddy demeanour of a 
weekend footballer meeting Cristiano Ronaldo. For big countries, 
the Eu is about clinging on to the remains of their former clout; for 
Small ones, the EU has made them more powerful than they could 
ever have dreamed. 

Alas, for the EU’s army of tiddlers, this golden era of tiny but 
mighty states is drawing to a close. Take tax, an area where small 
countries have long enjoyed their own exorbitant privilege. In a 
bloc where capital can flow freely, imposing lighter taxes than a 
near neighbour is a lucrative trick. Ireland and Luxembourg trans- 
formed themselves from nations of farmers and steelmakers re- 
spectively into two of the richest countries on the planet by under- 
cutting larger neighbours on tax. Capital flooded in, along with 
complaints from next door. Since the EU can legislate on tax only 
by unanimity, there was little the bloc could do. It asked them 


nicely to change. They said no. 

Times, however, are changing. Joe Biden, America’s president, 
has launched a crackdown on companies that book improbable 
Shares of their profits in low-tax jurisdictions, promising to 
whack punitive taxes on them. Ireland, which has a 12.5% cor- 
porate-tax rate, is sweating. With America leading the way, other 
big countries are set to sign up to the scheme. There is not much 
Ireland and friends can do to stop it. The commission, meanwhile, 
is still eyeing innovative ways of bypassing a country’s veto when 
it comes to tax, making ingenious but legally questionable use of 
provisions in the EU’s treaties. However it is done, the main perk 
of the small-country club is on the way out. 

Citizenship, like tax, is another fundamental right of states. 
Who but the Maltese government ought to decide who is Maltese? 
Malta and Cyprus have used this power to make easy money, 
hawking the right to live and work in the EU to anyone willing to 
spend a few million euros on government bonds or an expensive 
flat overlooking the Mediterranean. But when a national passport 
also confers citizenship of the EU, it becomes every member's 
business, some feel. The commission is taking steps to crack 
down on the practice. Another small-country privilege—to dish 
out passports however they see fit—is disappearing. 

A passport from a small country was once a shortcut to high of- 
fice in the EU. In European politics, the scale of the job used to be 
inverse to the size of their home country. People were happier to 
be bossed around by a Portuguese or a Luxembourger, rather than 
someone from France or Germany. (Luxembourg has produced as 
many commission presidents as France and Germany combined.) 
Things are moving on. Germany, in particular, is now more com- 
fortable laying claim to big jobs. Ursula von der Leyen was the first 
German to lead the European Commission since the 1960s. The 
European Central Bank, the institution which has done most to 
keep the euro together, has been led by bigger countries since its 
inception. Big countries want their people in senior posts. 

If anything symbolises the outsized power of small countries, 
itis the veto. On certain topics, asolitary “no” can still derail plans. 
But patience with this arrangement is wearing thin. Hungary, in 
particular, has adopted an obstructive instead of merely bombas- 
tic approach to Brussels. Rather than noisily railing against the EU 
while quietly going along with it, the country has made a virtue of 
blocking foreign-policy moves on such things as human rights in 
China. Yet whenever a sovereigntist like Viktor Orban wields a ve- 
to, the Eu’s federalists begin to cheer, arguing that he is making 
their case for them. An Eu that relies more on qualified-majority 
voting is grinding forwards. 


The small-country conundrum 

One unspoken consequence of the EU becoming more democratic 
is that its small states must become less powerful. While national 
governments still hold sway in the Eu, they create an imbalance. 
The EU was founded to rein in the excesses of big European pow- 
ers, not to replace them with the (admittedly less bloody) excesses 
of their smaller peers. A bloc where some citizens have more say 
than others is nota healthy one. True, other continental-sized pol- 
ities struggle with this question. In America, South Dakota has the 
Same number of senators as California. But that is no excuse to co- 
py their mistakes. Europe’s small countries should not fear losing 
clout. Until now they maintained their individual power as part of 
a weaker whole. In the future, they will play a smaller role ina 
stronger bloc. It is a different deal, but still sweet. m@ 


Thesaarieearl 


\ 


Gender wars 


Let’s talk about sex 


WASHINGTON, DC 


A backlash against gender ideology is starting in universities 


OURS BEFORE Jo Phoenix, a professor 
H of criminology at the Open University, 
was due to give a talk at Essex University 
about placing transgender women in 
women’s prisons, students threatened to 
barricade the hall. They complained that 
Ms Phoenix was a “transphobe’” likely to 
engage in “hate speech”. A flyer with an im- 
age of a gun and text reading “shut the fuck 
up, TERF’ (trans-exclusionary radical femi- 
nist, a slur) was circulating. The university 
told Ms Phoenix it was postponing the 
event. Then the sociology department 
asked her fora copy of her talk. Days later it 
told her it had voted to rescind its invita- 
tion, and would issue no more. Ms Phoenix 
says she was “absolutely furious and deep- 
ly upset” about both the damage to her rep- 
utation and to academic freedom. 

Essex University’s vice-chancellor 
asked Akua Reindorf, a lawyer who special- 
ises in employment and discrimination 
law, to investigate. Eighteen months later, 
in mid-May, the university published Ms 
Reindorf’s report on its website. It said Es- 
sex had infringed Ms Phoenix’s right to 
freedom of expression and that its deci- 


sion to “exclude and blacklist” her was also 
unlawful. It advised the university to apol- 
ogise to Ms Phoenix and to Rosa Freedman, 
a professor of law at Reading University 
whom it had excluded from an event dur- 
ing Holocaust Memorial Week “because of 
her views on gender identity”. (Essex in the 
end allowed Ms Freedman to attend.) 

Ms Reindorf’s report marks a challenge 
to the transgender dogma that originated 
on American campuses and has spread to 
universities around the English-speaking 
world. Its proponents hold that gender 
identity—the feeling that one isamanora 
woman—is as important as biological sex 
and that trans people should in all circum- 
stances be regarded as the gender with 
which they identify. This has increasingly 
influenced policy-makers: several places 
allow trans women into spaces that were 
once reserved for females, from sports 
teams to prisons and shelters for victims of 
domestic violence. 

The opposing viewpoint, which is often 
described as “gender-critical”, might once 
have been considered mainstream. It ar- 
gues that, since biological sex is unchange- 


The Economist June 5th 2021 





able, even with hormones, surgery or any 
other form of treatment, the conviction 
that one has been born in the wrong body 
should not be dispositive. Gender critics 
argue that biological differences between 
the sexes make the continued provision of 
female-only spaces necessary. Trans activ- 
ists say that trans women should have ac- 
cess to those places, too. “The emphasis 
that so-called gender-critical women place 
on what they describe as threats to women 
ignores the fact that trans women are over- 
whelmingly those who are threatened in 
single-sex spaces,’ says Lisa Miracchi, an 
assistant professor at the University of 
Pennsylvania who has signed open letters 
disapproving of gender-critical feminists. 

The arguments the two sides put for- 
ward, in other words, are complex and de- 
batable. But many trans activists think that 
any disagreement is tantamount to hate 
speech and try to suppress it. Some univer- 
sities with policies that reflect the belief 
that trans women are women have acted 
on complaints about people who do noth- 
ing more than express a contrary view. In 
May, after students at Abertay University 
in Dundee reported that a student had said 
at a seminar that women have vaginas and 
men are stronger, the university launched 
an investigation. 

In some cases, academics who have ob- 
jected to “gender ideology’—the view that 
gender identity should trump biology— 
have been removed from professional 
posts. In April Callie Burt, an associate pro- 
fessor at Georgia State University, was fired b> 


International 


» from the editorial board of Feminist Crimi- 
nology. She was told her presence might 
deter others from submitting manuscripts. 
The problem appears to have been her crit- 
icism of the conflation of sex and gender 
identity in proposed anti-discrimination 
legislation. Last June Kathleen Lowrey, an 
associate professor of anthropology at the 
University of Alberta, was removed as the 
chair of an undergraduate programme 
after students complained they felt unsafe. 
She says she reckons gender-critical post- 
ers on her office door were to blame. 

Yet the most worrying effect is likely to 
be invisible. An unknown number of uni- 
versity employees avoid expressing their 
opinion for fear it will damage their career 
or turn them into pariahs. The report about 
Essex Says witnesses described a “culture 
of fear” among those with gender-critical 
views. This is unlikely to be limited to one 
university. The report also argues that ex- 
pressing the view that trans women are not 
women is not hate speech and is not illegal 
under British law, whatever university 
policies might suggest. 


The fight back 
The report is likely to embolden gender- 
critical academics in Britain, at least, 
where they are already more outspoken. 
There are signs that a backlash to gender 
ideology is building elsewhere, too. In Feb- 
ruary, when Donna Hughes, a professor of 
women’s studies at Rhode Island Universi- 
ty, published an article critical of gender 
ideology, petitions sprouted calling for her 
to be fired. Her university denounced her 
and warned that the right to free speech 
was “not boundless”. Ms Hughes, who is a 
co-founder of the Academic Freedom Alli- 
ance (AFA), which was launched in March, 
says her university encouraged students to 
file complaints. She hired an “aggressive” 
lawyer. In May the AFA announced the uni- 
versity had dropped its investigations into 
Ms Hughes and affirmed her right to speak. 
Ms Hughes’s example is striking be- 
cause in America, where concerns about 
free speech in universities tend to focus on 
racial sensitivities, gender-critical views 
are rarely expressed publicly. This is partly 
because there is no federal legislation that 
specifically protects trans (or gay) people 
from discrimination, which lends a partic- 
ular urgency to LGBT activism. Jami Taylor, 
a professor of political science at the Uni- 
versity of Toledo and a trans woman, says 
She has experienced “transgender-related 
bias” throughout her career, from being 
called “it” by students and a colleague to 
being guided to the men’s bathroom. 
America’s political polarisation makes 
it harder yet to debate such topics. Trans 
activists often portray gender criticism asa 
far-right cause. Though it is becoming 
that, too, itis a topic on which leftist fem1- 
nists and social conservatives find agree- 


ment. In Britain most outspoken gender- 
critical academics are left-leaning, atheist 
feminists. Some in America are, too. 

Their chief concern is the preservation 
of female-only spaces. In February Holly 
Lawford-Smith, a professor of philosophy 
at the University of Melbourne, launched a 
website (noconflicttheysaid.org) which in- 
vited women to describe their experiences 
of sharing female-only spaces with trans 
women. It is not a research project and its 
reports are unverified. Most describe a 
feeling of discomfort rather than any form 
of physical assault. Soon afterwards, 
around 100 of her colleagues signed an 
open letter claiming the website promoted 
“harmful ideology”. It called for “swift and 
decisive action by the university”. Ms Law- 
ford-Smith kept her job, but there have 
been at least two marches at the university 
decrying that. “I think people quite enjoy 
having anemesis on campus,’ she says. 

How did an ideology that brooks no dis- 
sent become so entrenched in institutions 
supposedly dedicated to fostering inde- 
pendent thinking? Pressure groups have 
played a big part. In Britain most universi- 
ties and many public-sector bodies have 
joined the Stonewall Diversity Champions 
scheme, which means they have drawn up 
policies that reflect the group’s position on 
trans identity. The report about Essex said 
the university's policy “states the law as 
Stonewall would prefer it to be, rather than 
the law as itis”, and could cause the univer- 
sity to break the law by indirectly discrim- 
inating against women. It recommended 
that Essex reconsider its relationship with 
Stonewall. Several bodies, including the 
government’s equality watchdog, have 
since left the Champions scheme. 

The influence of pressure groups exem- 
plifies the other big reason trans ideology 
has gained a foothold in academia: its eli- 





The Economist June 5th 2021 


sion with the rights of gay people. Many or- 
ganisations established to defend gay 
rights have morphed into trans-rights 
groups. Tamsin Blaxter, a research fellow 
at Gonville & Caius College, Cambridge and 
a trans woman, says that academia has be- 
come a lot more welcoming to trans peo- 
ple, thanks largely to Stonewall. But some 
gay people disagree with its new focus. In 
2019 some supporters split from the group, 
in part owing to concerns that its stance 
encourages gay people to redefine them- 
Selves as trans (and straight), to form the 
LGB Alliance. Similar groups have sprung 
up around the world. 

Students increasingly express gender- 
critical views. This year a group of feminist 
students in Cambridge ran a “replatform- 
ing” event for gender-critical scholars who 
had been excluded from academic events 
(Ms Phoenix was among the speakers). So- 
phie Watson, one of the organisers, says 
she has lost friends over the issue. “There’s 
so much fear over using the wrong lan- 
guage—to disagree with the line that trans 
women are women is really considered 
hateful,’ she says. 


Campus revolt 

Gender-critical academics hope that as 
more of them speak out, others who share 
their concerns but were afraid to express 
them will feel emboldened. When Kath- 
leen Stock, a professor of philosophy at 
Sussex University and one of Britain’s most 
prominent gender-critical academics, was 
given a government award for services to 
education last December, hundreds of aca- 
demics from around the world signed an 
open letter denouncing her. More than 400 
signed a counter letter in her defence. But 
many people, she says, prefer to express 
their support privately. 

Universities will no doubt watch how 
the debate evolves outside academia, espe- 
cially in the courts. The dangers of eroding 
free speech are becoming increasingly ap- 
parent as judges rule on matters from the 
medical treatment of trans-identifying 
children to people who have been sacked 
after being accused of transphobia. If Maya 
Forstater, a British researcher who lost her 
job because of her gender-critical views, 
wins her appeal against the ruling of an 
employment tribunal that this was lawful, 
universities may become quicker to de- 
fend their gender-critical employees. 

Regulation may also play a part. In Feb- 
ruary the British government announced 
proposals to strengthen academic freedom 
at universities, including the appointment 
of a free-speech champion. Some (though 
not all) gender-critical academics wel- 
come the idea. In America lawsuits invok- 
ing free speech may make a difference. But 
it would be better if universities, which 
owe their success to a tradition of dissent 
and debate, did in fact defend it. &@ 


Business 


The car industry 


Chasing Tesla 


A traffic jam of startups is vying to follow in Elon Musk’s tyre tracks. Do any 


stand a chance? 


ARMAKING IS LITTERED with defunct 

marques, from Diatto and Hupmobile 
to Mercer and Whitlock. America spawned 
around 250 firms by the 1910s. As the 20th 
century wound to a close it had three that 
mattered: Ford, General Motors (GM) and 
Chrysler. In the past few years an electric 
version of the early American automobile 
boom is unfolding on a global scale. 

Chinese startups like Always, Li Auto, 
Nio, WM Motor and Xpeng are already mak- 
ing electric vehicles (Evs) in their thou- 
sands. In Europe, Croatia’s Rimac and 
Spain’s Hispano Suiza are building hyper- 
cars, while Britain’s Arrival is manufactur- 
ing electric vans. American companies 
such as Canoo, Fisker, Lordstown, Lucid 
and Rivian hope to start full-scale produc- 
tion soon. Foxconn, a Taiwanese contract 
manufacturer better known for making 
Apple’s iPhones, may soon also be assem- 
bling electric cars for others. As for Apple, 
its next gadget could be an iCar. 

Most of the insurgents are loss-making. 
Some have yet to earn any revenue. But all 
see a chance to grab a Slice of an industry 


that has turned decisively in the direction 
of battery power (See chart 10n next page). 
Everyone wants to be the next Tesla, which 
has successfully used batteries and clever 
software to take on the internal combus- 
tion engine. In the process Elon Musk’s 
firm has become the world’s most valuable 
car company, worth more than the next 
three biggest carmakers combined. 

Tesla’s $600bn valuation serves as a 
“torch at the front”, says Engelbert Wim- 
mer of e&Co, aconsultancy. Now investors 
are looking for the next beacon. Nio listed 
in New York in 2018. Xpeng and Li followed 
suit last year. All are worth as much or 


> Also in this section 

56 LEGO’'s diversity set 

56 Anime blockbusters 

57 Bartleby: Not-so-bullshit jobs 

58 China's military-industrial complex 


59 Schumpeter: Roche sees the future 


The Economist June 5th 2021 





more than many established carmakers. 
Arrival and several of the American firms 
have used mergers with special-purpose 
acquisition companies, Or SPACS, aS a 
shortcut to public markets—and to valua- 
tions in the billions. Patrick von Herz of 
Lincoln International, an investment 
bank, calls it a “global feeding frenzy”. He 
Xiaopeng, Xpeng’s boss, has said he ex- 
pects the market to swell to 300 or so firms 
before settling at around ten. How do the 
challengers avoid the fate of the forgotten? 

The basic blueprint for survival in- 
volves three elements. The upstarts must 
first find a starting niche from which they 
can expand. They then need actually to 
produce cars at scale. Finally, they have to 
create a sales-and-distribution network. 
Most will fail at one or more of these steps. 
Ironically, those with the best odds of emu- 
lating Tesla’s success may be the ones that 
look least like it. 

Start with picking your battlefield. That 
could be geographic. Philippe Houchois of 
Jefferies, another investment bank, reck- 
ons that the next Tesla will come from Chi- 
na. Consumers hungry for new tech anda 
government keen to support electrifica- 
tion have given China’s insurgents a head- 
Start. Nio, the largest of the lot, made 
44,000 Cars in 2020. It is valued at $69bn. 
The market capitalisations of Xpeng and 
Li, respectively $28bn and $22bn, are also 
juicy. Rich access to capital helps fund ex- 
pansion at home and abroad. Xpeng has al- 
ready started selling cars in Norway, home b> 


54 Business 


» to Europe’s most enthusiastic Ev buyers. 
Nio is about to join it. 

Even more important than geography is 
choosing the right market segment. Tesla 
was not the first to make Evs but it was the 
first to make big and pricey premium ones 
where the high cost of the battery could be 
absorbed. Many new firms are also aiming 
at premium suvs and saloons where profit 
margins are fattest. But competition is hot- 
ting up from established carmakers such 
as Volkswagen’s Audi and Porsche brands, 
as well as Mercedes. In April Geely, a Chi- 
nese firm with global ambitions, launched 
a premium electric marque called Zeekr. 
The mass market, meanwhile, is likewise 
busy, with GM and Ford the latest to an- 
nounce a big electric push. 

Other segments may therefore be a bet- 
ter bet. One is light commercial vehicles, 
demand for which has been boosted by the 
pandemic e-commerce boom. Alastair 
Hayfield of Interact Analysis, a consultan- 
cy, sees “no Tesla yet” for delivery vans. 
Carmakers are merely popping EV power 
trains into existing products—an unhappy 
compromise that affects performance. 
That leaves opportunities for firms like Ar- 
rival and Rivian. Another potentially lucra- 
tive niche is the hypercar. Wealthy petrol- 
heads seem willing to fork out $2m or so to 
add to their stables. Rimac and Pininfarina 
of Italy also see these cars as test-beds for 
EV technology to sell to other car firms. 
China’s Silk Ev considers its Hongqi sg hy- 
brid as a gateway to the mass market. 

Identifying the right segment may not 
be enough, however. Brian Gu, president of 
Xpeng, admits that the new firms must of- 
fer something truly different. For years the 
industry’s technologically stodgier incum- 
bents “didn’t realise it was a tech race”, says 
Peter Rawlinson, who runs Lucid. As cars 
become more like personal electronic de- 
vices, being tech firms first and carmakers 
second may confer an advantage. Fox- 
conn’s boss, Young Liu, has argued that the 
driving experience of the future will be 
“software-driven and software-defined”. 

Novel intellectual property is a “good 





= 
The Musk effect 
Light-vehicle sales, by power train 
Worldwide, m 
VAS) 
FORECAST 
ee | Hybrid* Hee 
80 
Electric 60 
batteryt 
40 


Conventional 20 
fuels 
0 


2018 21 25 30 35 
Source: BCG 


*Including plug-in TIncluding fuel cell 


| 

Elons in waiting 
Electric-vehicle makers 
Market capitalisation, 2021, $trn 


Next five biggest 


| able 





Jan Feb Mar Apr 


Source: Refinitiv Datastream 


visiting card” for investors, says Pedro Pa- 
checo of Gartner, a consultancy. But it is 
not enough to stick big touchscreens onto 
a standard electric power train, as many of 
the Chinese Tesla copycats are doing. The 
over-the-air software updates, proprietary 
charging networks and online direct sales 
pioneered by the American firm are now 
seen as table stakes. 

So the newcomers are trying to stamp 
their own technological mark on the in- 
dustry. Lucid’s techies have extracted range 
of up to 517 miles (832km) from its batter- 
ies. Nio offers a three-minute battery-swap 
service, to reassure Chinese buyers with- 
out access to home charging. Xpeng claims 
that its voice-activation system is the best 
in the business. Fisker and Canoo offer 
subscriptions that give motorists access to 
car use rather than ownership. 

Ultimately, buyers will decide which of 
these are desirable features and which are 
gimmicks. But not before the new models 
are produced and sold. Making a few thou- 
sand cars a year is hard enough (though 
losing money doing so is easy). Actually 
selling hundreds of thousands ata profit is 
another matter entirely. “Production hell” 
nearly sent Tesla under. A lead on flashy 
software must be backed up with giant 
presses, paint shops and assembly lines. 
As such, manufacturing an EV is in many 
ways not much different to making a petrol 
car, according to Bernstein, a broker—and 
no less expensive. A new purpose-built car 
factory that can churn out100,000 or SO ve- 
hicles a year costs at least $1bn. 

To get around this problem some of the 
challengers are instead repurposing exist- 
ing factories, as Tesla did by acquiring a 
disused one in Fremont, California, fora 
song. Rivian has moved into an old Mit- 
subishi factory in Illinois. Other newcom- 
ers are teaming up with the old guard, with 
experience of maintaining long and com- 
plex supply chains. Baidu has entered into 
a partnership with Geely and Huawei with 
its domestic rivals, BAIC, Changan and 
GAC. Fisker and Nio are taking an asset- 
light route by using contract manufactur- 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


ers of the sort used by big carmakers to 
make small runs of cars or those with fin- 
icky features such as folding roofs. 

Atrival’s approach may be the most in- 
novative. Where Tesla and others are going 
“giga’, the British firm says “micro”. Com- 
mercial vehicles do not require the styling 
or customisation of passenger cars, So it is 
eschewing production lines for “cell” as- 
sembly of composite panels. This can be 
done in small industrial units that cost just 
$40m-50m to buy and retool. These can 
produce 10,000 vehicles a year close to 
markets, adding scale with less risk. 

The final hurdle is flogging the vehicles 
to consumers. The new Ev-makers are 
mostly dispensing with traditional dealer 
networks in favour of Tesla’s model of on- 
line sales backed up with shops to show off 
their wares. That still leaves the challenge 
of creating a Servicing network if anything 
goes wrong. Such networks, which car buy- 
ers have come to expect, can be as expen- 
sive and tricky to scale up as manufactur- 
ing is. Mr Pacheco of Gartner notes that 
even Tesla’s is still a work in progress. In 
America the big three Detroit carmakers 
have nearly 10,000 dealerships that will 
service cars; Tesla has around 135. 

Many new firms won't get that far. Sev- 
eral have already suffered setbacks. Dyson, 
a British firm better known for vacuum- 
cleaners, sank £500m ($640m) into an EV 
effort only to conclude in 2019 that it would 
never make money. The same year Nio tee- 
tered on the brink of bankruptcy until the 
local government in its home city of Hefei 
bailed it out. A bloodbath awaits China’s 
myriad smaller Ev firms as they run out of 
ideas and money. Fisker is a reborn version 
of a firm that went bankrupt in 2013. 


Attention, vehicles reversing 

As the complicated reality of carmaking 
sets in, the hype is wearing off among in- 
vestors (see chart 2). Lordstown’s value has 
fallen by 65% since peaking in February, 
after it lowered forecast production for its 
pickup truck and said it needed fresh 
funds. Canoo’s shares are worth less than 
half what they were when it went public in 
December, owing to growing doubts about 
its business plan. 

In short, notes Aakash Arora of BCG, a 
consultancy, the new firms need to estab- 
lish brands. So far, he says, only Tesla has 
done so. It can take years to gain a reputa- 
tion for reliable products, while capital 
burns like petrol put to a spark. A new en- 
trant needs a trusted name, deep pockets 
and a proven ability to come up with clever 
tech. One company that has all those in 
Spades is Apple. The iPhone-maker has 
been working on an Ev for several years. 
The latest chatter is that it will have one in 
production by the middle of the decade. 
Some of its potential competitors will by 
then be well on the way to oblivion. @ 


AV,1f ot- Lap ot-) 9) ol) etme bet} (elm ie) cds 


Amazon Rainforest - National Forest 
of Carajds protected by Vale 
(area equtvalent to six times the size of London) 


= i 





June 5 
World Environment Day 


This is how it works in the forests: one thing leads to another. A tree leads to an insect, 

which leads to a bird, which leads to the work done by Vale, which, together with 

the people in the Amazon and the Atlantic Forest, can transform all of our lives. 

For more than 40 years, Vale has invested in socio-environmental projects and businesses, 
research, and the conservation of our woodlands. We maintain and protect over a million 
hectares, and, by 2030, we will be caring for an additional 500,000 hectares beyond Vale's borders. 
All of it contributing to our commitment to become carbon neutral by 2050. 


By taking care of our forests today, we transform everybody’s tomorrow. 


Paid by Vale 


Scan the QR Code with your phone 
to find out about all our actions. 
Or visit vale.com/carbonneutral 





56 Business 


Consumer goods and sexual identity 


When to mind 
your business 


BERLIN 
LEGO enters a marketing minefield 


with its first gay set 


(47 T IS A branding message that fits into 
the moral confusion of our time,” 
thundered Albert Mohler, the high-profile 
president of the Southern Baptist Theolog- 
ical Seminary in Louisville, Kentucky, in 
one of his daily podcasts at the end of May. 
Christian evangelical leaders and pundits 
at Fox News, a conservative cable network, 
are up in arms about the international 
launch on June 1st, the first day of Pride 
month, of LEGO’s lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, queer, intersex, asexual and 
anyone who is not included (LGBTQIA+) 
set. Will Cain, a conservative Fox News 
host, joked that the colour-coded segrega- 
tion of the new diversity toy could have 
been designed by David Duke, a former 
Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan. 
Marketing gay-themed products can be 
a boon for consumer-goods companies— 
or a humiliating embarrassment. In the 
early 1980s Sweden's Absolut vodka was 
one of the first consumer brands to go after 
the gay consumer (considered a trendset- 
ter) by advertising in LGBTQ media outlets, 
sponsoring events such as the Pride parade 
and donating to charities. LEGO, which is 
Danish, waited another four decades to 
launch “Everyone is Awesome’, a 346-piece 
set of 11 monochrome mini-figurines in the 
colours of the Progress Pride Flag. Brown 
and black figures represent ethnic diversi- 
ty; pale blue, white and pink reflect the 
transgender banner. Each comes with an 
individual hairstyle but no defined gender 





Structural diversity 


(except for the beehive bewigged purple 
drag queen). 

“This is new territory for us,’ admits 
Matthew Ashton, who designed the figu- 
rinesasa“display” or “statement” for those 
aged 18 or over. (Hundreds of thousands of 
LEGO customers are adults.) In the past the 
company made a few subtle nods to gays, 
such as a little rainbow flag in a model of 
Trafalgar Square and a bride and groom 
sold separately. Mr Ashton initially created 
the set for his personal desk, but it soon at- 
tracted the attention of colleagues. He 
hopes it will start many conversations he 
wishes he could have had when growing 
up as a gay man in Britain in the 1980s. 

Ian Johnson, chief executive of Out 
Now, a consultancy advising companies 
on the development of LGBTQ marketing 
strategies, says his initial reaction to the 
toy’s launch was dismissive. He thought 
LEGO was just another firm keen to make a 
quick buck at the start of Pride Month; the 
global spending power of gay consumers is 
around $3.9trn annually, according to LGBT 
Capital, a research firm. He changed his 
mind once he saw how LEGO made its new 
product very visible by, for instance, pub- 
lishing a five-minute video on its website 
of Mr Ashton telling the story of his teen- 
age struggles with his sexuality at the 
height of the AIDS epidemic. 

Corporate rainbow-washing can occa- 
sionally backfire. The launch in 2019 of a 
LGBTQ sandwich (lettuce, guacamole, ba- 
con and tomatoes) by Marks & Spencer, a 
British retailer, provoked a_ backlash 
among gays enraged about being equated 
with a sarnie. Burger King, an American 
chain of fast-food restaurants, triggered a 
similar reaction when it wrapped its whop- 
per in rainbow-coloured foil. 

In January last year the chief executive 
of Hallmark Channel, an American televi- 
sion network specialising in family films, 
had to resign after pulling ads showing a 
Same-sex couple marrying and kissing— 
and then reversing the decision following 
an outcry by consumers. This year Monde- 
lez, a packaged-food behemoth, had to de- 
fend a British advertising campaign for its 
Cadbury Creme Egg in which a male gay 
couple passes a chocolate egg from mouth 
to mouth. 

LEGO is aware of the need to tread care- 
fully with cultural sensitivities and reli- 
gious customs. The new set will not be sold 
in Indonesia, Kuwait, Malaysia, Qatar, 
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, 
where displaying a sexual identity other 
than straight can be unsafe (though the 
firm may launch it in Russia next month, 
despite widespread homophobia there). 
Ultimately it is up to local toy shops to de- 
cide which LEGO sets they sell. Few are like- 
ly to boycott the popular blocks altogether. 
And the toy shop in Reverend Mohler’s par- 
ish can just give the new seta pass. @ 


The Economist June 5th 2021 





Entertainment 


Feeling animated 


TOKYO 
Can anime’s blockbuster success 
outlast the pandemic? 


T FIRST CRITICS doubted that “Demon 

Slayer: Mugen Train”, which hit Ameri- 
can cinemas in April, could replicate the 
success it achieved in its Japanese home 
market. The animated feature is set in 
early-20th-century Japan, an unrelatable 
era for non-Japanese viewers. Defying the 
odds, the film raked in $19.5m during its 
opening weekend, breaking America’s box- 
office record for a foreign-language debut. 

For most of its history “anime” was 
little-known outside Japan. “Astro Boy”, a 
TV series from 1963 that sparked the first 
anime boom, and subsequent hits like 
“Doraemon” and “Gundam”, were watched 
mostly by otaku (geeks). Nerdy connota- 
tions limited their appeal at home. Titles 
that made it to the West from the 1970s also 
catered to niche audiences. 

Now, gushes Muto Takashi, who runs 
Dentsu Japanimation Studio, “anime is no 
longer a subculture; it is a major culture.” 
In 2019 anime-related revenues from TV, 
streaming and gaming rights, live enter- 
tainment, cinema tickets and merchan- 
dise sales hit ¥2.5trn ($24bn). Just under 
half came from abroad, where the anime 
market has almost quintupled in size over 
the past decade. Figures for the pandemic 
year are scarce but are almost certainly 
higher. Netflix says that over 100m house- 
holds around the world streamed at least 
one of its anime titles in 2020, 50% more 
than the year before. These featured in the 
streaming service’s daily top-ten list in 
nearly 100 countries last year. 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


» Netflix and its rivals, such as Hulu and 
Amazon Prime Video, have exposed the 
global audience to an extensive library of 
Japanese anime. The pandemic, which put 
many live-action shoots on ice, further in- 
creased the appeal of anime to streamers. 
Anime films are also relatively cheap to 
make. Sudo Tadashi, an anime critic, esti- 
mates that an anime show on Netflix costs 
around ¥30m-50m ($275,000-459,000) per 
episode to make—a pittance next to the 
$13m reported for “The Crown”. 

Netflix has acquired the rights to distri- 
bute 21 films produced by the renowned 


Studio Ghibli to about 190 countries (ex- 
cluding America, Canada and, ironically, 
Japan). It is also creating its own animated 
content. In March the company said it 
would launch 40 new anime titles this 
year, nearly double the number released in 
2020. It has also signed production agree- 
ments with nine anime studios. Last year 
Sony, an electronics group with a big enter- 
tainment arm, offered to pay $1.2bn for 
Crunchyroll, which began life peddling pi- 
rated anime content before going legal in 
2009 and being bought in 2018 by AT&T, an 
American telecoms giant. Crunchyroll, 


Detecting the real bullshit 


A popular theory isn't borne out by the evidence 


OST PEOPLE feel, from time to time, 

that their work is meaningless. 
David Graeber, the late anthropologist, 
built an elaborate thesis out of this in- 
sight. He argued in a book in 2018 that 
society has been deliberately creating 
more and more “bullshit jobs” in profes- 
sions such as financial services to fill the 
time of educated workers who need the 
money to pay off student debts but who 
suffer from depression because of their 
work. His thesis has been cited more 
than 800 times by academics, according 
to Google Scholar, and often repeated in 
the media. 

When the book came out, this col- 
umnist was unimpressed, arguing that 
the thesis was a partial reworking of the 
insights of C. Northcote Parkinson, who 
argued that bureaucracy has an innate 
tendency to expand and make work for 
itself. Three academics—Magdalena 
Soffia, Alex Wood and Brendan Bur- 
chell—have undertaken a systematic 
analysis* of the claims behind Mr Graeb- 
er’s work and found that the data often 
show the exact opposite of what he pre- 
dicted. The bullshit-jobs thesis, in other 
words, is largely bullshit. 

In his book, Mr Graeber relied heavily 
on surveys of British and Dutch workers 
that asked participants whether their job 
made a meaningful contribution to the 
world. This seems a high bar to clear; it is 
unsurprising that 37-40% of respondents 
thought their job didn’t qualify. By con- 
trast, the academics used the European 
Working Conditions Surveys, which by 
2015 had talked to 44,000 workers across 
35 countries. They focused on those 
respondents who thought that the state- 
ment “I have the feeling of doing useful 
work’ applied to them “rarely” or “never”. 

In contrast to the high share of bull- 
shit jobs reported by Mr Graeber, in 2015 


only 4.8% of respondents in the Eu felt 
their work was useless. And this propor- 
tion had fallen, not risen, in recent years, 
from 5.5% 1n 2010 and 7.8% in 2005. 

Furthermore, those who work in cler- 
ical and administrative jobs are far less 
likely to view their jobs as useless than 
those who are employed in roles that Mr 
Graeber regarded as essential, such as 
refuse collection and cleaning. Indeed, the 
researchers found an inverse relationship 
between education and the feeling of 
usefulness. Less educated workers were 
likelier to feel that their jobs were useless. 
And student debt does not appear to bea 
factor. In Britain, where its level is the 
highest in Europe, non-graduates under 
29 were twice as likely to feel useless as 
their indebted graduate peers. 

So what is really going on? Part of the 
problem, surely, is the prejudice felt by 
academics like Mr Graeber towards those 
who work in finance or other capitalist 
occupations, anda resentment that such 
people earn so much more than those who 
work in the caring professions or manual 
labour. To be fair, Bartleby has met manya 





Business 57 


which now boasts 100m registered anime 
aficionados around the world, is a rare ex- 
ample of a specialised David holding its 
own in a world dominated by generalist 
Goliaths like Netflix and Disney. 

An obstacle to further growth may be 
flesh and blood. “The industry has strug- 
gled to nurture animators,’ says Iwaki Aya- 
ka of the Tokyo-based wiT Studio. The 
dwindling domestic talent pool could have 
trouble meeting rising demand. Good 
news for the animators, whose historically 
miserly wages may edge up. For anime fans 
around the world, notso much. & 





financier and businessman who is preju- 
diced in the other direction—believing 
that academics and those in other “dilet- 
tante” jobs (like journalism) are living off 
the wealth that capitalists generate. 
Another factor is the human tendency to 
adopt the culture of their profession; 
those who sell assault rifles or homeo- 
pathic medicines eventually come to 
believe they are doing good work. 

But part of Mr Graeber’s thesis turns 
out to be correct. Employees who think 
their work is useless tend to feel anxious 
and depressed. The reason, the academ- 
ics suggest, is linked to the Marxist idea 
of “alienation”, which described what 
artisans felt in the 19th century when 
they stopped working for themselves and 
were dragooned into factories. 

Alienation depends on how the work- 
ers are treated by those in charge. “If 
managers are respectful, supportive and 
listen to workers, and if workers have the 
opportunities for participation, to use 
their own ideas and have time to doa 
good job, they are less likely to feel that 
their work is useless,” the researchers 
write. Workers are likelier to feel useless 
when they lack the chance to use their 
Skills or display autonomy. This problem 
more often bedevils those in low-paid 
work than graduates in the professions. 

In essence, this is a restatement of the 
old adage that “people don't leave bad 
jobs, they leave bad managers.’ Itisa 
backhanded compliment to managers 
that less than 5% of workers feel their 
efforts are useless. You need not envision 
an elaborate conspiracy to explain why 
people occasionally find their jobs bor- 
ing or dispiriting. That’s life. 


* “Alienation is not ‘bullshit’: an empirical critique 
of Graeber’s theory of BS Jobs”, Work, 
Employment and Society, June 2021 


58 Business 


Chinese armsmakers 


The best-laid battle plans 


HONG KONG 


The cold war with America both helps and hinders China’s 


military-industrial complex 


IANGHANG AIRCRAFT EQUIPMENT has 
Facaated to tantalise investors with the 
fuel systems and detachable petrol tanks it 
builds for Chinese warplanes. The compa- 
ny, controlled by Aviation Industry Corpo- 
ration of China (Avic), the country’s big- 
gest aerospace-and-defence conglomerate, 
had witnessed its share price slump by 
50% since it went public in Shanghai last 
year. But in the first three months of the 
year demand for its wares has soared. On 
May 28th Jianghang said that net profit for 
the period nearly doubled, year on year. 
Trading in its shares subsequently had to 
be halted after their price rose by 10%, the 
maximum permitted one-day swing. 

Jianghang is just one of dozens of mili- 
tary-linked companies on a high. Most are 
not publicly traded and disclose little fi- 
nancial information. State-owned builders 
of navy vessels have flotillas of listed sub- 
Sidiaries. AVIC, the main group behind Chi- 
na’s fighter-jet programme with more than 
itrn yuan ($157bn) in total assets, has 24 
publicly traded divisions. To get a sense of 
the industry analysts track dozens of small 
military stocks. Citic Securities, an invest- 
ment bank, covers 58. Everbright, a state- 
owned broker, follows 115. 

The total weapons sales of China’s four 
biggest firms that make them—of which 
AvIc is the largest—have been flat at just 
over $50bn since at least 2015, according to 
the Stockholm International Peace Re- 
search Institute (SIPRI), a think-tank, even 
as those of foreign rivals have grown. But if 
the listed divisions are a guide, things may 
be looking up for the sector. 

The combined operating income of 
firms followed by Everbright rose by 1% 
last year, to 475bn yuan. Citic reckons that 
net profits for the industry’s listed contin- 
gent grew by about 50% in 2020. As China’s 
economy boomed in the first quarter, espe- 
cially compared with last year’s harsh co- 
vid-19 lockdowns, only agribusiness and 
miners of non-ferrous metals notched up 
faster year-on-year revenue growth than 
China’s military-industrial complex. 

The main reason for this armsmaking 
bonanza is China's increasingly chilly rela- 
tionship with America. One note to inves- 
tors from Huaxi Securities, a broker, was 
embellished with an image of two fists, 
draped in opposing American and Chinese 
flags, flying towards each other. America’s 
attempts to “lock China out of technologi- 
cal advancement”, Huaxi analysts say, is 


Spurring new growth. Citic talks of “a per- 
iod of volatility not experienced in 100 
years” and predicts “a rare period of rapid 
development” in China’s military-indus- 
trial enterprise as a result. SIPRI noted in 
December that Chinese arms groups were 
benefiting from a programme aimed at 
modernising its armed forces. 

The domestic market is becoming 
increasingly important for Chinese weap- 
ons companies. According to SIPRI, Chi- 
na’s arms exports declined by 8% between 
2016 and 2020. At the same time, those of 
America, France and Germany grew. Chi- 
nese drones may be cheaper than Western 
ones but they are also seen as less capable. 


Fusion firepower 

In an effort to change that state of affairs, 
and bolster domestic armsmakers in the 
process, Chinese officials talk up “mili- 
tary-civilian fusion”. This long-standing 
project aims to bring cutting-edge civilian 
technologies such as artificial intelligence 
and semiconductors into military supply 
chains, in keeping with the Communist 
Party slogan that “civilians and troops are 
members of the same household.” The 
idea’s manifestations include Hikvision, a 
state-owned maker of surveillance kit, 
which made 2.2bn yuan in net profit in the 
first quarter, up by 45% from a year earlier. 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Ironic, then, that the same Sino-Ameri- 
can tensions that are boosting Chinese 
armsmakers may end up undermining this 
Strategy. The idea of civilian-military fu- 
sion spooked Donald Trump’s administra- 
tion and prompted it to bar American firms 
from supplying companies like Huawei, a 
giant maker of telecoms gear that is per- 
ceived as being close to the People’s Libera- 
tion Army (PLA). The result has been disas- 
trous for Huawel. Its revenues fell for the 
second consecutive quarter earlier this 
year. It is struggling to procure chips and 
more Western countries are shunning its 
5G mobile networks. 

Blacklisting by America may also de- 
prive some defence-adjacent Chinese 
firms of a source of capital. Foreign owner- 
ship of military-linked stocks was thought 
to be low. It may soon be non-existent. 
Since January American investors have 
been barred from owning shares in China 
Spacesat, a state-owned Fortune 500 firm 
that helps run the country’s space pro- 
gramme. The same month Fidelity Invest- 
ments, an American asset manager, con- 
firmed to its clients that it would sell some 
securities as a result of sanctions. 

Mr Trump’s successor, Joe Biden, shows 
little intention of easing the restrictions. 
On June 2nd Bloomberg reported that he 
plans to tighten some of them once again 
on firms with ties to surveillance and de- 
fence groups. A recent paper from the Cen- 
tre for a New American Security, a think- 
tank, noted that the Chinese leadership’s 
continued obsession with military-civil 
fusion reflects concerns that reforms to 
bring it about “have not progressed rapidly 
enough”. American military strategists 
would love it if China’s efforts to speed 
things along had the opposite effect. m 


mettre 


J = mt } 
—~— 


—arggr 4 


" nt -a 


Strategic order book 





WHAT IS 
AVAXHOME ? 











the biggest Internet portal, 
providing you various content: 
Me brand new books, trending movies, 
fresh magazines, hot games, 


recent software, latest music releases. 


OF alivaauhacxemcy-haicyi-kernfelamelal=mleh)\a elala= 
Cheap constant access to piping hot media 
Protect your downloadings from Big brother 

Safer, than torrent-trackers 


18 years of seamless operation and our users: satisfaction 


All languages 
Brand new content 
One site 








AVALI 


AvaxHome - Your End Place 





- t. 
*. 
Fa es 
: ie “—* 
: . - 
3 e*, 
Ak . , 
7 uy B, < 
~ : 
. , 
. » > 
ot cs 
; 
my. + Se 
¥ 
7 
i ; 
, 
Xe CO SST Eee 
& 
ait 
> * 


We have everything for all of your needs. Just open https://avxlive.icu 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Business 


Schumpeter | The firm that saw the future 


Long ago Roche bet on personalised health care. Now its time has come 


© 





OCHEIS A Strange entity. The Swiss giant is the world’s second- 

biggest drugmaker and one of big pharma’s most profitable 
firms. But its largest shareholding group, mostly descended from 
Fritz Hoffmann-La Roche, who founded the company in 1896, is 
led by Andre Hoffmann, a nature lover and sustainability advocate 
who believes that the purpose of business is not mainly to make 
money. Even its bosses are discouraged from making a quick 
franc. Severin Schwan, an Austrian who has led the company since 
2008, is only Roche's seventh CEO in 125 years. Much of his pay is 
tied up in company stock for ten years, giving him, as he puts it, 
“literally a vested interest” in its long-term future. 

Another thing sets Roche apart from the crowd. For two de- 
cades it has nurtured an unflashy diagnostics division alongside 
its mainstay of drug production, in an effort to create more perso- 
nalised health care. This unit, which accounts for almost a quarter 
of sales, has generated lower margins than pharmaceuticals, and 
puts off the sort of investors who yearn only for blockbuster medi- 
cines. Had it not been for the Hoffmanns’ patience, some suspect, 
activists would have forced Roche to Sell it or spin it off long ago. 

And yet in the past year or so the ability to diagnose a disease in 
its early stages has fully come into its own. The division has 
helped the company through the covid-19 pandemic. Roche was 
not one of the star vaccine producers, but its workaday PCR and 
antigen tests bolstered profits despite a slowdown in cancer treat- 
ments, its biggest business. Moreover, advances in gene sequenc- 
ing and other techniques from molecular biology helped identify 
SARS-COV-2, the covid-19 virus, as well as ways to fight it. That has 
highlighted the value of combining biotechnology and diagnos- 
tics. These are both fields in which Roche excels. 

Far from shedding diagnostics, Roche is now doubling down 
on it, expanding into digitisation and advanced data analytics to 
create individually tailored cancer treatments. This is, says Tim 
Haines, boss of Abingworth, a biotech venture-capital firm, “the 
golden age of diagnostics”. Bets placed years ago are making the 
stodgy-sounding, Basel-based company look prescient. 

Mr Schwan, whose background is in diagnostics, can barely 
contain his excitement. After a long conversation with The Econo- 
mist, he came back for more a day later. As he explains, cancer is a 


panoply of diseases based on individual mutations. Diagnostics 
identifies genetic and other differences between patients, leading 
to the creation of more personalised treatments. The tailor-made 
market, by definition, is smaller than the one for blockbuster 
drugs, but if patients respond better to treatment, the value of 
drugs can be proportionally higher. Sifting through oceans of ge- 
nomic data can produce yet more precision. 

Accumulating reams of information on patients has long sat 
awkwardly with concerns about medical privacy. Less so now, Mr 
Schwan believes. He says the pandemic has helped change the 
mood in two ways. First, the use of data-crunching to speed up the 
fight against covid-i9 has made health authorities, hospitals and 
doctors more amenable to the idea of sharing medical records— 
provided the information is anonymised. This is, after all, bio- 
tech, not big tech. “We are not in the advertising business,” he 
says. Second, regulators have shown what he describes as an 
“incredible” willingness to speed up drug approval by gaining 
access to clinical-trial data in real time. “Why should we not do the 
same for life-saving cancer medicines?” 

Roche, which has recently fallen behind Merck, an oncology 
rival, in immunotherapy treatments, has been eagerly waiting for 
this digital tide to turn. Two American acquisitions in 2018 could 
prove particularly fruitful. One is Foundation Medicine, a gene- 
sequencing company that can identify cancers from DNA in blood 
samples, instead of from tumour biopsies. The other is Flatiron 
Health, a specialist in cancer-related health records that generates 
data on patients from the real world, supplementing clinical 
trials. Both produce what Roche calls insights on cancer. Like its 
diagnostics business, not only do they help it further its own drug 
development; they also sell services to rivals, making them busi- 
nesses in their own right. They are not yet profitable, but one day, 
Mr Schwan says, the “insights” business could be a third pillar for 
Roche—as big, if not bigger, than diagnostics and pharma. 

There are potential pitfalls. Biology is as messy and unpredict- 
able as nature itself. Data analytics may not be as useful in biotech 
as in other industries. Roche will not have the field to itself. Sili- 
con Valley tech giants are already muscling in. And Europe, where 
Roche is based, has long been squeamish about data-gathering 
and privacy. If that continues to apply to medicine, it will hobble 
the region’s health-care industry. 

That said, Roche has a record of pulling off the unexpected. Ste- 
fan Schneider of Vontobel, a Swiss investment firm, notes that it 
has accomplished the rare feat of keeping profits ticking over even 
as patents on its three biggest cancer drugs, which had peak annu- 
al revenues of $21bn, have expired. Its immunotherapy drug, Te- 
centriq, has recently shown promising results in early-stage lung- 
cancer care, which may bea big breakthrough. And it has mastered 
the art of buying trendy biotech firms without spoiling their inno- 
vative fizz. 


Black Schwan 

Indeed, its success vindicates long-term thinking and shows that 
shareholders’ focus on notions like sustainability can co-exist 
with commercial success. For all the Hoffmann family’s influence, 
Mr Schwan is no softy. He defends high drug prices in America. He 
believes in strong intellectual-property protection. When Ameri- 
ca’s government this year threw its support behind patent waivers 
for covid-19 vaccines, he compared it to communist East Ger- 
many’s nationalisation of drugmakers. Roche may be unusual. As 
one of Europe's few world-class megafirms, itis ballsy, too. @ 


59 


Finance & economics 


The Economist June 5th 2021 








Commercial property 


Shaky foundations 


As office buildings remain empty, does a financial reckoning loom? 


FFICES THESE days are temples of in- 

dulgence as much as places of work. 
One Vanderbilt, a new skyscraper in Man- 
hattan, has unveiled a restaurant run by 
Daniel Boulud, a Michelin-starred chef. 
Amazon's second headquarters in Arling- 
ton, Virginia, will include an amphitheatre 
for outdoor concerts. In London, 22 Bish- 
opsgate is so dog-friendly that its recep- 
tionists issue passes to pets. The recently 
opened glass tower, which dominates the 
City of London’s skyline, also houses a 
climbing wall anda spa. 

As companies try to tempt workers back 
to the office, developers and investors are 
betting on new buildings with alluring 
amenities. But a huge uncertainty hangs 
over them: will enough people come? Even 
aS vaccinations progress, workers have 
been slow to return. In early May only one 
in 20 buildings in America had occupancy 
levels above 10%, compared with a third in 
Europe and Africa, and roughly half of 
buildings in Asia, according to Freespace, a 
property-tech firm. With the return to 
work only just beginning, stimulus still in 
place and long leases yet to expire, the ex- 


tent of any losses is worryingly hazy. 
Covid-19 has sharpened the demand for 
newer buildings with better facilities. 
JPMorgan Chase, a bank, will reduce its 
overall office space even as it builds the 
second-tallest skyscraper in Manhattan for 
its new headquarters. More than half of 
tours across New York City by prospective 
tenants are of high-quality “Grade a” offic- 





Ss 
Pretty vacant 
Office vacancy rates, % 
20 
oN tedstates i 
10 
5 
0 
2011 ~Ss«*13 15 17 (ones 
Source: JLL 


> Also in this section 
61 OPEC's latest trials 
62 Hong Kong's unsinkable house prices 


63 Publiccash and private equity in China 


63 Covid's corporate winners and losers 


64 Twilight of the tax haven... 
65 ...and dawn for poor countries? 
66 Free exchange: The Goldilocks zone 


— Buttonwood is away 


es, compared with 38% before covid-19. 
This shift is happening alongside another 
disruption: a tilt towards greener work- 
Spaces. Energy efficiency and air-filtration 
systems are now Seen as essential. Asset 
managers including BlackRock and Brook- 
field have pledged to get their assets to net- 
zero emissions by 2050 or sooner. Many 
property firms are pledging that all new 
buildings will be net-zero carbon. The shift 
towards wellness and sustainability is no 
fad, insists James Goldsmith of AXA Invest- 
ment Managers. “This isn't a social experi- 
ment. We're asset managers—pension 
money is at stake.” 

Few in the industry, however, will be 
drawn on the reckoning they may face. The 
flight to quality is leaving older buildings 
looking undesirable just as remote work- 
ing reduces the total demand for office 
Space. Start with the risk that older build- 
ings become stranded assets. Around half 
of Hong Kong’s premium stock and nearly 
two-thirds of commercial property in Lon- 
don were built more than 20 years ago. SL 
Green, Manhattan’s largest office landlord, 
says rents at its older properties are down 
by as much as 10%. Without substantially 
lower rents or improved ventilation, ac- 
cess to outdoor space or natural light, ma- 
ny will struggle to sell or attract tenants. 

Some dated offices are getting facelifts. 
Fabrix, a developer, is upgrading a 1960s 
building in London to include a rooftop 
forest and a glass-floored infinity pool. 
Others will be converted into lab and re- 


search space, or houses. When AIG, an 1n- >> 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


>» Surer, moves to a recently renovated sky- 
scraper in midtown Manhattan, part of its 
old headquarters, a tower block built in the 
1980S, will be converted into flats. The City 
of London Corporation, which oversees 
the Square Mile, plans to turn vacant space 
into at least1,500 new homes by 2030. 

Yet none of this can mask the fact that 
as remote working sticks, demand for of- 
fice space should fall. Companies are be- 
ginning to rethink their property needs, 
with many downsizing or delaying new 
leases. Globally, more than 103m square 
feet of office space has already been vacat- 
ed since the pandemic began, according to 
Cushman and Wakefield, a broker. That is 
18% more lost floor space than during the 
financial crisis of 2007-09. Vacancy rates 
rose steeply over the past year, reaching 
18% in the spring in America (See chartion 
previous page). The forecasts are gloomy. 
Roughly one in five offices in America will 
be empty in 2022, according to Moody’s 
Analytics, a consultancy. Rents across the 
country are projected to fall by 7.5% this 
year; those in San Francisco, by 15%. 

Puzzlingly, the gloom has not yet made 
its way into conventional measures of 
prices and credit. Rent-collection rates for 
properties run by real-estate investment 
trusts (REITS) in North America remained 
above 90% for most of last year, according 
to S&P, a rating agency. They may have ris- 
en since then. The Economist has examined 
collection rates for half a dozen of the 
world’s big listed office landlords: the aver- 
age Stands at 98% for the most recent quar- 
ter. Delinquency rates on commercial- 
mortgage-backed securities linked to 
shops spiked last summer, and are still 
high, according to Trepp, a data provider. 
But those for offices have been unper- 
turbed by the pandemic, at around 2%. The 
price paid for office space in several big cit- 
ies has also held up so far (see chart 2). 

A number of obfuscating factors cloud 
the picture, however. Generous stimulus 
might have postponed increases in delin- 
quencies and distressed sales. And many 
firms have not made up their minds yet. No 


4 
Unfazed? 
Office sale prices, Q1 2007=100 







300 
San Francisco 
250 
| Paris* £00 
Manhattan 
, 150 
Frankfurt 
100 
London* 
50 
2007 09 11 ls [5 17 Wo ZI 
Source: Real Capital Analytics *City centre 


i 
Knocked down 


MSCI World REITs* index 
January 1st 2007=100 






200 
Residential 
150 
Office [_ 20 
Retail 
| 0 
2007 09 11 1 ie ye see 


Source: Refinitiv Datastream *Real-estate investment trusts 


one knows how many workers will stay 
home, and for how many days of the week. 
For the most part, investors are avoiding 
rash transactions: buyers are wary of over- 
paying, while sellers are unwilling to takea 
loss in case the crisis turns out to be a blip. 
The volume of sales has shrunk, making 
prices a less reliable gauge of health. 

One way to penetrate the uncertainty is 
to look at more forward-looking measures 
of valuations. These suggest that office 
property has been dealt a blow by covid-19. 
A price index based on appraisals, calculat- 
ed by Green Street, a research firm, is 9% 
below its pre-pandemic peak in America. 
The share prices of REITs that invest in of- 
fices remain 13% below their level in early 
2020 (see chart 3). 

Central banks are on the alert. The reli- 
ance of commercial property on debt fi- 
nancing means a downturn could have 
nasty reverberations across the financial 
system. Banks’ exposures are sizeable: the 
stock of loans made to the sector by Amer- 
ican banks exceeds $2trn, or about a fifth of 
their total lending. In its latest Financial 
Stability Review the European Central Bank 
warned that subdued activity could be 
masking deeper trouble, and deemed risks 
from property to be “elevated”. Many pen- 
sion funds around the world have loaded 
up on commercial property in recent years 
as lower interest rates have forced them to 
seek returns from less liquid assets. 

The fate of office property could well 
rest on vacancy rates. If they stay high, 
then things could start to get hairy. In April 
the IMF reckoned that a lasting increase in 
the vacancy rate of five percentage points 
would dent commercial-property valua- 
tions by 15% over five years. Fitch, another 
rating agency, estimates that the value of 
offices in America could fall by more than 
half if workers continue to work from 
home for three days a week. The long-term 
nature of property leases and the contin- 
ued availability of debt mean that losses 
from the pandemic may not materialise for 
several years. But if the reckoning comes, it 
will be painful. 


Finance & economics 


Oil prices 


The clumsy cartel 


NEW YORK 
OPEC’s discipline will be tested as oil 


demand picks up 


(€7HE DEMAND picture has shown clear 
T siens of improvement.” So declared 
Abdulaziz bin Salman, the energy minister 
of Saudi Arabia, at a virtual gathering of the 
Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC) on Juneist. The cartel and 
its allies, chief among them Russia, have 
been squeezed badly by the covid-induced 
recession, which cut global demand for oil 
from nearly 100m barrels a day (bpd) in 
2019 to 91m last year. In a frantic effort to 
prevent a price collapse, OPEC+, as the 
group calls itself, agreed to cut output in 
early 2020. Yet it failed to stop the price 
dipping below $20 a barrel (see chart). 

Now the cartel believes that oil demand 
is at last on a firm path to recovery. Minis- 
ters agreed to boost supply by roughly 
450,000 bpd in July, part of their plan to re- 
store nearly half of the output cuts made 
last year. Saudi Arabia, which boasts the 
lowest production costs and the most 
Spare capacity in the cartel, and often acts 
aS a Swing producer, indicated it would al- 
sO soon reverse a unilateral output cut of 
1m bpd made earlier this year. 

In response, the price of the benchmark 
Brent crude shot above $70 a barrel onJune 
ist for the first time in two years. Several in- 
dicators confirm the view that oil demand, 
a proxy for economic growth, is taking off. 
Oilinventories, which shot up last year, are 
falling sharply. The International Energy 
Agency, an official body, estimates that 
global oil demand may recover to pre-pan- 
demic levels within a year. In America, de- 
mand for petrol surged during the Memo- 
trial Day weekend at the end of May, a ro- 
bust start to its summer “driving season”. 


61 


OPEC's celebrations may yet prove pre- b> 





= 
In recovery 
Brent crude oil price, $ per barrel 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 


NSS a io ie Tee 


Source: Bloomberg 


201 


62 


Finance & economics 


>» mature. One drag on prices could be Iran, 


where output has been curbed by Ameri- 
can sanctions. Speculation that negotia- 
tions to revive a deal on Iran’s controver- 
Sial nuclear programme might soon make 
progress proved unfounded. The delay 
means extra Iranian oil is not about to sud- 
denly flood the market. But if a deal is 
somehow struck this summer, analysts 
reckon that Iranian exports could rise by 
1m bpd or more by the end of the year. 

Furthermore, though tight inventories 
and high demand push up prices in the 
near term, those very same prices will 
tempt America’s shale-oil producers, cur- 
rently restraining investment, to splash 
out. Saudi Arabia might also find it harder 
to keep OPEC disciplined, observes David 
Fyfe of Petroleum Argus, an industry jour- 
nal. Members tend to adhere to agreed cuts 
when demand is collapsing, but rising 
prices encourage cheating. 

A bigger worry, says Paul Sheldon of 
S&P Global Platts, an analytics firm, is “an 
unexpected demand setback” in 2022. 


Hong Kong 


Failure to land 


HONG KONG 


America and China are back to their gas- 
guzzling ways thanks to the spread of vac- 
cines; Europe is not far behind. But energy 
demand in India and Latin America, where 
the pandemic still rages, remains fragile. 
Mr Fyfe points out that long-haul transpor- 
tation is another source of weakness. 

The gravest threat to the cartel comes 
from technological change. There are 
widely divergent views on how quickly de- 
mand for the black stuff will give way to 
greener fuels, even among oil majors. But 
purveyors of petroleum will almost cer- 
tainly find a carbon-constrained world 
tough going. Edward Morse of Citigroup, a 
bank, makes a subtler point about innova- 
tion. Oil may surge to $80 a barrel in the 
short term, but that is hardly the start of a 
“new secular bull run”: as the global cost of 
finding and developing oil has fallen by ov- 
er half in the past five years to $10-15 per 
barrel, he reckons fair value for crude is 
$40-55. The “clumsy cartel”, as Morris 
Adelman, an energy economist, once 
dubbed OPEC, isin forarocky ride. @ 


Protests and a pandemic have not broken the property market. What could? 


LANES NO LONGER land in Kai Tak, Hong 

Kong’s old airport. But nostalgists can 
stroll along the new “sky garden’, an ele- 
vated walkway lined with frangipani, myr- 
tle and acacia, that passes above the old 
runway. By scanning a QR code along the 
route, visitors can “augment reality” by su- 
perimposing an image of a landing plane 
on their selfies. The park is part of a rede- 
velopment plan that will eventually yielda 
hospital, tax office and new homes for tens 
of thousands of people. On either side of 
the walkway, cranes, diggers and welders 
labour busily to augment the reality of 
Hong Kong's cramped and pricey housing. 

They have their work cut out for them. 
Property in Hong Kong remains horribly 
expensive, despite two years of protests 
and pandemic. House prices in April were 
only 1.5% below their peak in 2019. In one 
tower block being built in Kai Tak, a flat of 
889 square feet sold last month for over 
HK$30m ($3.9m). 

The property market has resisted the 
pandemic better than it did the SARS out- 
break of 2003, when prices fell by almost 
8%. Indeed, the market has remained tight 
this time partly because of decisions made 
back then. When SARS struck, house prices 
had already fallen by more than 60% since 
1997. To curtail supply the government re- 


solved to “withdraw from its role of prop- 
erty developer’, vowed not to “sell land ata 
pathetic price”, and reported with satisfac- 
tion that the supply of new flats was dwin- 
dling. Hong Kong built nine new towns 
(now home to almost half of its population 
of 7.5m) between the 1970s and the early 
2000S. It has not finished any since. 
Instead the government has corralled 
housebuilding into smaller, piecemeal 





Returning to earth 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


El 
Confidence and supply 


Hong Kong, homes 





Units, m Total additions, 
Q4 2020 ‘000 units, 2021-31 
75 
Building 
taller 800 
mclannlelaemm 600 
Public rental (eS Bear 
scenario* . 
creel antelaceyal 400 
1.0 
Private 0.5 Base 200 
scenario 
0 





*Significant policy-driven 


Source: Morgan Stanley Supply increases 


sites, often located in and around existing 
developments. It is too embarrassed to call 
them “new towns”, said one speaker at a re- 
cent conference hosted by Hong Kong Uni- 
versity Business School. It calls them “new 
development areas” instead. 

With the help of such sites, the govern- 
ment hopes Hong Kong will add 430,000 
flats over the next ten years. That, it reck- 
ons, would satisfy rising demand. But 
these targets tend to be over-optimistic: 
since 2007, housebuilding has undershot 
them by about 18% in an average year. If the 
pattern persists, Hong Kong will add only 
about 350,000 homes in the next decade. 

In this “baseline” scenario, housing is 
likely to grow dearer still, according to 
Morgan Stanley. So what would it take to 
curb property prices? The bank has also put 
together what it calls a “bear” scenario 
where prices fall by a fifth or more. For that 
to happen, Hong Kong would have to add 
about 730,000 homes over the next ten 
years, the bank calculates, increasing the 
existing stock by almost 30% (see chart). 

That would require encroaching on 
fields, sea and sky. Hong Kong would have 
to build taller, packing more floor space in- 
to each site. It would have to speed up the 
conversion of farmland, which can take 15 
or more years. And it would have to add 
235,000 homes on land reclaimed from the 
Sea. This would include the government’s 
controversial plan to add land to eastern 
Lantau, Hong Kong’s biggest island, home 
to 172,000 people as well as white-bellied 
eagles, Bogadek’s burrowing lizards and 
finless porpoises, which conservationists 
argue could be threatened by the initiative. 

Although it would take years for these 
efforts to reach fruition, a credible plan 
could change sentiment—and prices—im- 
mediately, points out Praveen Choudhary 
of Morgan Stanley. In the bear scenario 
house prices fall by 20% by the end of 2022. 
The downward turn would, in other words, 
resemble one of the abrupt landings in Kai 
Tak that used to make arriving in Hong 
Kong so thrilling. m 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Private equity in China 


Serving a higher 
purpose 


HONG KONG 
The Chinese state is pumping public 
funds into private equity 


TATE CASH is burning a hole in the pock- 
S et of Shenzhen’s Communist Party sec- 
retary. Wang Weizhong told angel inves- 
tors late last year that if they set up a fund 
in the south China tech hub, the govern- 
ment would bear 40% of their losses. For 
the monstrous 40obn-yuan ($62bn) state 
fund backing such activity, an investment 
of 3m yuan—the size of a typical angel in- 
vestment—is a rounding error. For private 
investors the invitation sounds too good to 
be true. It might be. 

After several years of loose monetary 
conditions and bumper dealmaking, li- 
quidity in private equity (PE) in China be- 
gan to dry up in 2018. New regulations 
made it harder for banks and insurers to 
invest. So-called “government-guided” 
funds set up by local governments or na- 
tional ministries, by contrast, thrived. Lo- 
cal authorities were encouraged to launch 
such investment vehicles to lure startups 
to their cities, along with talent, technolo- 
gy and, eventually, tax revenues. Owing to 
a lack of in-house investment talent, most 
of them have acted as limited partners 
(LPS) in private-sector funds. 

More than 1,000 government-guided 
funds have cropped up across China since 
2015. By late 2020 they managed some 
9.4trn yuan, according to China Venture, a 
research firm. A national fund focused on 
upgrading manufacturing technology held 
147bn yuan at the last count. One specialis- 
ing in microchips exceeded 200bn yuan in 
2019. Almost every city of note across Chi- 
na operates its own fund. A municipal 
fund in Shenzhen says it has more than 
4oobn yuan in assets under management, 
making it the largest city-level manager of 
its kind. In the northern city of Tianjin, the 
Haihe River Industry Fund is putting to 
work 100bn yuan along with another 
4oobn yuan from other investors. 

AS a result, PE in China is now flush 
with state financing. In 2015 private-sector 
money made up at least 70% of limited- 
partner funds pouring into the industry. By 
the end of 2019, state-backed funds ac- 
counted for at least that much. Their domi- 
nance has only increased since then; by 
some counts they hold more than 90% of 
the money in Chinese funds of funds (ie, 
those that invest in other funds). Accord- 
ing to Chinese media, learning to deal with 
government funds is now a “required 
course” for PE managers. 

A degree of state influence is now un- 





avoidable. But whether that is beneficial or 
not is hotly contested. Some investors and 
advisers say taking government cash can 
help align private and public interests. 
“Government LPs can open doors for you,’ 
says Kiki Yang of Bain, a consulting firm. 
State fund managers often understand lo- 
cal policy objectives and can steer inves- 
tors in the right direction, says a venture- 
capital investor. The influence can go too 
far, however: Shenzhen Capital, a huge 
state fund, posted pictures on its website 
of a meeting it held in December where it 
helped each of the 42 companies it had in- 
vested in to launch a Communist Party 
committee. These are seen as a way to im- 
bue private companies with party ideology. 

There are other drawbacks, too. Govern- 
ment funds are “squeezing out other LPs”, 
says one of China’s top venture-capital in- 


= 
Mixed blessings 


Change in revenue and profit, 2019-20*, % 
OECD countries, best- and worst-performing sectors 


@ Profit 
-50 -25 


" Revenue 
25 


Real estate 


0 
Software and services bes 


Pharmaceuticals 





Transportation : 
Consumer services — 
Energy a 
Source: OECD 


Divergence, big time 


Finance & economics 


vestors. Clear mismatches in interests 
have also surfaced. Members of China’s PE 
elite cut their teeth at global investment 
groups such as KKR and TPG, two American 
firms. Their main aim is to produce hefty 
returns for LPs. Not so for government- 
guided funds. “Rarely do you have a guided 
fund that is chasing returns,” says an ad- 
viser to several of them. Instead, state in- 
vestors are mainly trying to engineer a 
windfall in local tax revenues by attracting 
new companies, especially tech groups. 
Balancing these interests can lead to ten- 
sions, Says one China-based investor, and 
often results in investments that hinge on 
whether or not a company is willing to 
move toa specific city. Some even fear such 
problems could gradually lower overall re- 
turns for private-sector investors. 

So far, though, the arrangement has 
worked well for many private funds. With 
smaller funds dying off over the past few 
years—either owing to lack of capital or 
huge losses—competition for target assets 
has eased a little. The market is healthier, 
investors Say, as private and state capital is 
channelled to better fund managers. 

But will it last? One lingering concern 
for some PE investors is that government 
funds might dispense with the middle- 
men, and do more of their own direct in- 
vesting. Several large government funds 
have been recruiting from private-sector 
banks and law firms, bolstering their abili- 
ty to cut deals, notes a lawyer who works 
with them. “They are starting to compete 
with us directly,” says the venture-capital 
investor. Private investors will appreciate 
State cash much less when they are vying 
to outbid it. @ 


Corporate bankruptcies 
% change during crisis 


® Global financial crisis’ Ml Covid-19+ 

“50 ( SO Ol es) oro) EO 
Spain 
United States 
Japan 
Germany 


France 





Britain 


*Financial years 1Q12008-peak *Q42019-Q4 2020 


In its latest Economic Outlook, the OEcD argues that economies are likely to diverge, as 
some (America and China) recover from the pandemic faster than others (many poor 
countries). Covid-19 has also struck different sectors differently: tech and pharmaceu- 
tical firms prospered; transport and energy firms suffered. Despite such disparities 
governments policies successfully put the economy into “hibernation”: in many places 
there were fewer bankruptcies in the final quarter of 2020 than in 2019. The trickiness 
now is in judging when activity is strong enough for support to be withdrawn. 


63 


64 Finance & economics 





Overhauling corporate tax (1) 


The twilight of the tax haven 





The global tax pact under discussion would ruin a lucrative business model 


SIS OFTEN the case in multilateral mat- 

ters, America held the key. When Janet 
Yellen, its treasury secretary, announced 
earlier this year that it was time to end the 
“trace to the bottom” on corporate tax, her 
remarks supercharged sputtering talks ov- 
er a global deal to overhaul how much tax 
multinational companies pay, and where. 

Talks are focused on two main changes: 
reallocating taxing rights towards coun- 
tries where economic activity takes place, 
rather than where firms choose to book 
profits; and setting a minimum global tax 
rate, likely to be in the region of 15%. Fi- 
nance ministers from the G7 group of rich 
countries are set to signal their approval at 
a meeting on June 4th-5th. The broader 
G20 could agree terms as soon as July, spur- 
ring the other 120 or so countries and terri- 
tories involved in the talks to fall into line. 
On May 26th Germany’s finance minister 
predicted a “revolution” in global tax rules 
“in just a few weeks”. 

All revolutions have winners and los- 
ers. In this case the clearest victors would 
be large economies where multinationals 
make lots of sales but book relatively little 
taxable profit, thanks to tax-planning that 
siphons income to low-tax jurisdictions. 
This mismatch has grown along with the 
rise of digital giants like Apple and Google, 
the assets of which are largely intangible. 
Poor countries where global companies 
have factories and other operations stand 
to benefit, too, though not by as much as 
they think they should (see next story). The 
most obvious losers will be the havens 
that, starting more than half a century ago, 


took increasing advantage as globalisation 
made capital more footloose—offering 
what they saw as much-needed tax compe- 
tition, and what many others saw as beg- 
gar-thy-neighbour economics. 

A study in 2018 concluded that around 
40% of multinationals’ overseas profits are 
altificially shifted to low-tax countries. 
One official closely involved in the current 
talks thinks the deal taking shape could 
“all but kill the havens”. However, havens 
come in various shapes and sizes, from 
taxless Caribbean paradises to merely tax- 
light hubs in Europe and Asia. Some have 
more to fear than others. 


Paradise lost 

Things look bleak for the palm-fringed, ze- 
ro-tax territories, such as Bermuda, the 
British Virgin Islands (BvI) and the Cay- 
man Islands. Though they make nothing in 
corporate-tax revenue, they have, to differ- 
ing degrees, come to rely on fees from sub- 
Sidiaries of large companies and a cottage 
industry of accountants, lawyers and other 
corporate-service providers that sprouted 
up locally to serve them. Their revenue is 
mere crumbs compared to the taxes saved 
by those firms, but a lot for such small 
economies. Corporate and financial servic- 
es accounted for over 60% of the BVI's gov- 
ernment revenue in 2018. 

The type of deal that the Biden adminis- 
tration is pushing—which would apply the 
global minimum rate on a country-by- 
country basis, rather than in aggregate— 
would blow up these havens’ business 
model. They are livid, but there is nothing 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


they can do. A diplomat says they are in the 
process of being “neutralised”, and are “ir- 
relevant” to the talks. “No one wants to 
hear from them.” Some at least have other 
revenue streams: Cayman is a big domicile 
for hedge funds, Bermuda for insurers. 

Better-connected economies that have 
traditionally been friendly to corporate- 
tax-planners are less easy to dismiss. Sev- 
eral European Union countries, such as 
Ireland and Cyprus, have lured investment 
with alow corporate-income-tax rate (both 
levy 12.5%), or, aS Luxembourg and the 
Netherlands have done, with rules that 
make them attractive conduits in tax struc- 
tures, helping companies avoid tax in oth- 
er countries. An IMF study in 2019 found 
that such “phantom” investment had 
pushed Luxembourg’s stock of foreign-di- 
rect investment to $4trn, an improbable 
one-tenth of the global total. Hong Kong 
and Singapore have also benefited as cor- 
porate-tax entrepots. 

Some of the more egregious loopholes 
fuelling these flows have been closed in re- 
cent years, following an oOEcD-brokered 
deal in 2015. Among them is the Double 
Irish, which funnels profits to subsidiaries 
registered in Ireland but tax-domiciled in 
Bermuda or the Cayman Islands, and 
which may have saved Google alone tens of 
billions of dollars over a decade. 

There is still plenty to lose, though. Ire- 
land is particularly nervous, having come 
to rely on its 12.5% rate to attract foreign in- 
vestment, much of it involving real people, 
offices and factories. Corporate tax now ac- 
counts fora record 20% of the country’s to- 
tal tax take. The Irish have been lobbying 
America, the source of much of their i1n- 
vestment, against a radical reallocation of 
taxing rights and a minimum tax above 
12.5%. Ireland’s finance minister, Paschal 
Donohoe, has argued that smaller coun- 
tries should be allowed to use tax policy to 
make up for the advantages of scale, loca- 
tion and resources that big ones enjoy. 

Even a minimum rate of 12.5%, or only 
just above it, could cost Ireland, though, 
when you factor in tax breaks. Many big 
companies using it pay an effective rate in 
the single digits. The country’s “patent 
box”, ascheme for profits from innovation, 
charges just 6.25%. A firm paying that 
might quickly tire of Irish charms if faced 
with a six-percentage-point top-up. The 
government has pencilled in an annual 
tax-revenue loss from the putative global 
deal of €2bn ($2.5bn)—around 2.4% of 
public revenue, and the equivalent on a 
GDP basis to America losing nearly $140bn. 

Ireland has some friends in the EU. 
Hungary, with a rate of 9%, is a noisy 
champion of tax competition. Cyprus and 
Malta are sympathetic, too, though “happy 
to sit in Ireland’s shadow’, says another of- 
ficial. Outside the EU, Singapore and Swit- 
zerland have signalled that they consider b> 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


» 15% too high. The Asian hub would be hap- 
pier with 10%. 

Luxembourg and the Netherlands, 
however, have undergone Damascene con- 
versions. The Grand Duchy, lambasted 
after a leak in 2014 exposed sweetheart tax 
deals with dozens of multinationals, has 
passed reforms that narrow tax-arbitrage 
opportunities and increase tax-ruling tran- 
Sparency. It says it could live with any deal 
that levels the playing field. The Dutch gov- 
ernment, stung by public criticism of its 
tolerance of tax tricks, has also been trying 
to close loopholes. “We won't be the ones 
who obstruct the deal,” says Hans Vijlbrief, 
the Dutch state secretary for finance. “My 
goal is to not be mentioned any more inthe 
list of tax paradises.” 


Overhauling corporate tax (2) 


That leaves Ireland and other EU mal- 
contents in a bind. They could in theory 
wield vetoes, since the bloc’s tax decisions 
require unanimity. But that looks highly 
unlikely given the support for change from 
the union’s big members and America— 
not to mention the awful politics of block- 
ing adeal seen by the publicas necessary to 
force big business to pay its fair share. 

Moreover, America and others could 
impose minimum taxes on their own com- 
panies even without a global deal; indeed, 
America already has a version for intangi- 
ble income, albeit set at just 10.5%. The rev- 
olution is coming, barring an unexpected 
breakdown in talks. And with it, a golden 
era for the world’s tax havens may be draw- 
ingtoaclose. 


Fighting for the scraps 


Will poor countries benefit from international tax reforms? 


NTERNATIONAL TAX reform pits tax-hun- 
les governments against giant multina- 
tional companies and their armies of tax 
advisers. It sets high-tax jurisdictions 
against low-tax havens (see previous sto- 
ry). And it requires rich- and poor-country 
governments to somehow reach agree- 
ment. The 139 countries haggling at a fo- 
rum run by the OEcD, a club of mostly rich 
countries, have yet to reach a consensus. 
Poorer countries worry that the proposals 
on the table discussed are too complicated, 
inflexible and unfair. 

Developing countries are thirsty for 
revenue in general, and reliant on cor- 
porate tax in particular. In 2017 African 
countries raised 19% of their overall rev- 
enue from corporation tax, compared with 
an average of just 9% for OECD members. 
That is partly because large informal sec- 
tors mean that they raise less in, say, perso- 
nal-income tax. 

The current system for global tax dings 
poor countries in two ways. For a start, 
multinational companies shift their re- 
ported profits to low-tax havens, depriving 
them of revenue. Then the rules allocate 
taxing rights to countries that are home to 
company headquarters, which tend to be 
rich. Poor countries’ tax revenues are de- 
pressed by as much as 5% relative to an al- 
ternative system in which profits are taxed 
based on the current location of compa- 
nies’ revenues, their employees and their 
wage bills, according to an estimate by Petr 
Jansky of Charles University and Javier 
Garcia-Bernardo of the Tax Justice Net- 
work, an advocacy group. By contrast, 


those in rich countries are only 1% lower. 
The reforms being discussed, and sup- 
ported by America’s Biden administration, 
would reallocate the right to tax a slice of 
some companies’ profits, and agree on a 
global minimum corporate-tax rate, per- 
haps of 15%. Poor countries want to crack 
down on tax avoidance as much as rich 
ones. But a lack of cash and personnel 
makes it harder for them to engage in ne- 
gotiations. Though low-income countries 
represent 22% of negotiating members, 
they make up only 5% of those attending 
important working-party meetings. Those 
constraints apply to the ability to adminis- 
ter tax and police evasion, too. On May 12th 
the African Tax Administration Forum 


~~ 


Working out the tax bill 


Finance & economics 


(ATAF), a group of national agencies, criti- 
cised the idea of reallocating the right to 
tax the portion of multinationals’ profits 
above some “routine” level, as “far too 
complex”, suggesting that a share of total 
profits be reallocated instead. 

Another worry is that the new deal will 
become a Straitjacket. The Biden adminis- 
tration has proposed a “binding, non-op- 
tional” dispute-resolution process as a way 
of reassuring anxious companies that they 
will not be taxed several times over. But 
some poor countries fear being on the 
wrong end of rulings too often, and see 
broadly applied binding arbitration as a 
“red line”. (A process applying to a narrow- 
er set of disputes could fly, however.) An- 
other concern is that a minimum tax could 
threaten poorer countries’ use of tax in- 
centives to reel in investment. But a mini- 
mum rate of 15% is still well below most 
poor countries’ statutory tax rate, leaving 
room for enticement. A global floor might 
encourage some countries to go the other 
way, by emboldening them to raise taxes 
on profits that are reported at home. 

Perhaps the biggest complaint is that 
rich countries may get the bulk of taxable 
profits being grabbed back from havens, 
while poor ones are left with the scraps. In 
October the OECD estimated that a realloca- 
tion of taxing rights on some companies 
might help raise corporate-tax revenues in 
poor countries by around 1% (a newer pro- 
posal from the Biden administration 
Should yield a similar sum). One negotia- 
tor for an African country called that a “di- 
saster for developing countries”. ATAF sug- 
gested that more companies be included, 
by drastically lowering the revenue thresh- 
old from €2o0bn ($24bn) to €250m. It is 
hard to imagine rich countries agreeing to 
that. The complex knock-on effects of a 
proposed minimum tax of 15% could raise 
poor countries’ corporate-tax take by an- 
other 2-4%. Even so, rich countries will 
probably make bigger gains still. m 





65 


66 Finance & economics 


Free exchange | Pace your debts 


New research explores the limits to government borrowing 





HE SCALE of Joe Biden’s plans is hard to exaggerate. Where the 

American president’s former boss, Barack Obama, pivoted 
quickly to deficit-cutting after the trials of the global financial cri- 
sis, Mr Biden's first budget, which he unveiled on May 28th, will 
borrow unapologetically. The plans assume that annual fiscal def- 
icits will exceed 4% of GpP through to the end of the decade; net 
public debt will rise to 117% of GDP in 2030 from 110% today. The 
largesse raises two big questions. One is whether, coming on top 
of past stimulus packages, it will contribute to an overheating of 
America’s economy in the short term. The other important ques- 
tion is whether in the longer term America can prudently afford to 
loosen the purse-strings for a sustained period. As crisis has hit 
and interest rates have fallen, politicians have felt more able to 
run up debts than in the past. But the issue of whether and when 
limits to borrowing might apply still remains. Recent research 
casts light on these constraints. 

Ina new working paper, Atif Mian of Princeton University, Lud- 
wig Straub of Harvard University and Amir Sufi of the University of 
Chicago attempt to gauge governments’ room to run. Their analy- 
sis (which does not incorporate the effects of the pandemic) 
builds on recent work that estimates how the “convenience yield” 
on government bonds—or the amount by which a bond’s yield is 
reduced because of the safety and liquidity benefits it offers inves- 
tors—varies with the size of the debt burden. Other things equal, 
the greater the volume of outstanding bonds, the higher the return 
investors demand. Work by Arvind Krishnamurthy of Stanford 
and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen of the University of California, 
Berkeley, suggests, for example, that a10% increase in the ratio of 
debt to GDP pushes government-bond yields up by 0.13-0.17 per- 
centage points. (In practice, of course, other things are not always 
equal: the long-run effect of increased bond supply on safety and 
liquidity premia may be offset by other factors, such as a short-run 
Surge in demand for safe assets prompted by financial instability, 
leading to falling bond yields amid rising debt loads.) 

Because the supply of bonds matters, Mr Mian and co-authors 
write, a level of government debt that is too lowcan result in an in- 
terest rate that slinks towards zero. But rates cannot fall much fur- 
ther below zero; the result is narrower scope for central banks to 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


stimulate activity, and therefore lower economic growth and 
higher unemployment. The problems of debt sustainability are of- 
ten associated with high debt levels, which push the interest rate 
above the economic-growth rate. When that condition is met, the 
debt burden grows steadily even in the absence of new borrowing. 
But the authors raise the theoretical possibility of another source 
of fiscal-sustainability problems: when too low a level of debt 
leads to serious deflation, dragging the growth rate into negative 
territory and below the interest rate. 

In between those two extremes, the researchers argue, lies a 
“Goldilocks zone” in which a fiscal free lunch is possible. They 
flesh out a point highlighted in 2019 by Olivier Blanchard of the Pe- 
terson Institute for International Economics: that when the inter- 
est rate on public debt is below the economy’s growth rate, exist- 
ing debt burdens have essentially no fiscal cost. In such cases, ex- 
isting debt will decline as a share of output even if no new taxes 
are levied—though a government that continues to run deficits 
may nonetheless add to its debt pile. Assuming a balanced budget 
and based on estimates of the convenience yield on Treasuries, 
the authors reckon that America’s Goldilocks zone—the maxi- 
mum level of debt you could reach and then stabilise without rais- 
ing taxes—could extend up to about 260% of GDP. (The uncertain- 
ty around their estimates means the limit could lie between 230% 
and 300% of GDP.) 

There is also a range of indebtedness across which govern- 
ments may run deficits in perpetuity without increasing the debt 
burden. America, they estimate, could run a deficit of 2.1% of GDP 
for ever so long as its debt is below 130% of GppP (after which 
threshold the largest deficit that could be run in sustained fashion 
without raising the debt burden drops steadily towards zero). 

This logic suggests that though supersized deficits may be ap- 
propriate now, America cannot run them for ever. Doing so would 
cause debt to rise, potentially out of the Goldilocks zone and into 
riskier territory. And the longer America waits to shrink its deficit 
to the maximum sustainable level, the closer to surplus (or the 
further into surplus) that level will be. Mr Biden may take some 
comfort from the fact that his borrowing is manageable for now. 
Even so, it could eventually limit America’s fiscal freedom. 


Bonds away 
Importantly, a Goldilocks window is not fixed. Slower economic 
growth could shrink the safe zone by narrowing the gap between 
growth and interest rates—unless, that is, an economic slowdown 
also causes a sharp drop in interest rates, pushing them closer to 
zero and necessitating fiscal stimulus. Rising inequality may lead 
to calls for redistribution, but because the rich tend to buy govern- 
ment bonds in disproportionate numbers, levelling the income 
distribution may reduce the scope for a fiscal free lunch. That also 
means, the authors note, that efforts to address wide deficits 
through progressive taxes may not bear much fruit: taxes on high 
earners will hoover up money that might be used to buy bonds. 
Analyses such as these are trying to understand circumstances 
outside of historical experience, and necessarily come with large 
uncertainties and assumptions attached. Budget-setting politi- 
cians too have uncertainties to navigate, and must do so carefully. 
Government borrowing plays a starring role in today’s macroeco- 
nomic zeitgeist. A balance of sorts is still required, between mak- 
ing good use of the government's capacity to borrow, and ac- 
knowledging that limits to public borrowing are not so distant 
that they can be ignored altogether. @ 


Science & technology 


Inventing the future 


Cloning DARPA 


A growing number of governments hope to copy the famous research agency 


SING MESSENGER RNA to make vac- 
Urcines was an unproven idea. But if it 
worked, the technique would revolution- 
ise medicine, not least by providing pro- 
tection against infectious diseases and 
biological weapons. So in 2013 America’s 
Defence Advanced Research Projects Agen- 
cy (DARPA) gambled. It awarded a small, 
new firm called Moderna $25m to develop 
the idea. Eight years, and more than 175m 
doses later, Moderna’s covid-19 vaccine sits 
alongside weather satellites, Gps, drones, 
Stealth technology, voice interfaces, the 
personal computer and the internet on the 
list of innovations for which DARPA can 
claim at least partial credit. 

It is the agency that shaped the modern 
world, and this success has spurred imita- 
tors. In America there are ARPAS for home- 
land security, intelligence and energy, as 
well as the original defence one. President 
Joe Biden has asked Congress for $6.5bn to 
set up a health version, which will, the 
president vows, “end cancer as we know it”. 
His administration also has plans for an- 
other, to tackle climate change. Germany 
has recently established two such agen- 


cies: one civilian (the Federal Agency for 
Disruptive Innovation, of SPRIN-D) and an- 
other military (the Cybersecurity Innova- 
tion Agency). Japan’s interpretation is 
called Moonshot R&D. In Britain a bill for 
an Advanced Research and Invention 
Agency—often referred to as UK ARPA—iS 
making its way through Parliament. 


An agency needs agency 

As governments across the rich world be- 
gin, after a four-decade lull, to spend more 
on research and development, the idea of 
an agency to invent the future (and, in so 
doing, generate vast industries) is alluring 
and, the success of DARPA suggests, no 
mere fantasy. In many countries there is 
displeasure with the web of bureaucracy 


2 Also in this section 

68 Composing by computer 

69 Cicadas, insecticides and children 
70 Unreliable alibis 


70 Theorigin of watermelons 


The Economist June 5th 2021 





that entangles funding systems, and hope 
that the DARPA model can provide a way of 
getting around it. But as some have disco- 
vered, and others soon will, copying DARPA 
requires more than just copying the name. 
It also needs commitment to the principles 
which made the original agency so suc- 
cessful—principles that are often uncom- 
fortable for politicians. 

On paper, the approach is straightfor- 
ward. Take enormous, reckless gambles on 
things so beneficial that only a handful 
need work to make the whole venture a 
success. AS Arun Majumdar, founding di- 
rector of ARPA-E, America’s energy agency, 
puts it: “If every project is succeeding, 
you're not trying hard enough.” Current 
(unclassified) DARPA projects include 
mimicking insects’ nervous systems in or- 
der to reduce the computation required for 
artificial intelligence and working out how 
to protect soldiers from the enemy’s use of 
genome-editing technologies. 

The result is a mirror image of normal 
R&D agencies. Whereas most focus on ba- 
Sic research, DARPA builds things. Whereas 
most use peer review and carefully select- 
ed measurements of progress, DARPA 
strips bureaucracy to the bones (the con- 
versation in 1965 which led the agency to 
give out $1m for the first cross-country 
computer network, a forerunner to the in- 
ternet, took just 15 minutes). All work is 
contracted out. DARPA has a boss, a small 
number of office directors and fewer than 
100 programme managers, hired on fixed 


short-term contracts, who act in a manner >> 


68 Science & technology 


» akin to venture capitalists, albeit with the 
aim of generating specific outcomes rather 
than private returns. 

The first challenge for the new ARPAs is 
to secure the breathing space required for 
such experimentation. SPRIN-D illustrates 
how difficult this can be. The concept was 
approved by Germany’s cabinet—“and 
then the Federal Court of Auditors came 
along,’ sighs Barbara Diehl, SPRIN-D’s chief 
partnership officer. After the auditors is- 
sued their recommendations, the agency 
lost its exemption from standard public- 
sector procurement rules and pay scales, 
restricting who it could hire and the sorts 
of risks it could take. Existing government 
ministries exert influence through the 
agency's board, stymying radicalism, says 
Ms Diehl. Dominic Cummings, a former 
aide to Boris Johnson, Britain’s prime min- 
ister, who demanded a British agency as a 
condition of his employment, has said he 
is concerned by the provisions for ministe- 
rial oversight in the legislation creating it. 

Without freedom from political inter- 
ference, the risk-taking instincts of those 
at the cutting edge are curbed. The admin- 
istrative and research directors of Ger- 
many’s Cybersecurity Innovation Agency 
recently quit, frustrated by political inter- 
ference. In America the homeland-security 
ARPA was established in 2002, but has been 
hamstrung by power struggles in the de- 
partment that gave it its name. “It has nev- 
er been allowed to make independent deci- 
sions, it has never been allowed an inde- 
pendent budget,” says an observer. There is 
a debate about whether the Biden adminis- 
tration’s health ARPA (ARPA-H) Ought to 
stand alone, or be part of the National In- 
stitutes of Health (NIH). The latter would 
be less of a legislative challenge, but may 
infringe its independence. 


Progress report 
DARPA’s budget in 2020 was $3.6bn, equiv- 
alent to just 8% of the NIH'’s. If all goes to 
plan, ARPA-H will be ona similar scale, but 
none of the others receives such funding 
(ARPA-E got $425m last year, roughly as 
much as one of DARPA’S Six Offices). Since 
the model works by making lots of bets in 
the hope that a few will come off, stingier 
funding means fewer wagers, which re- 
duces the chance of success and thus of 
continued political support. This is espe- 
cially true given the difficulty of measur- 
ing progress. As a paper by Pierre Azoulay 
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technol- 
ogy (MIT) and his colleagues notes: “It is 
impossible to accurately measure the inci- 
dence of one-in-a-thousand ideas, much 
less one-in-a-million ideas, on a timescale 
relevant to political decision-making.” 
The new agencies must also work out 
how to get their innovations out of the lab. 
There is a close relationship between DAR- 
PA and the Department of Defence, which 


is a customer for its work. But other agen- 
cies lack such a pipeline. Research by Anna 
Goldstein at the University of Massachu- 
setts, Amherst, and her colleagues finds 
that, although new “cleantech” companies 
Sponsored by ARPA-E produce more pat- 
ents than others, they are not more likely 
to raise venture capital, be acquired by 
larger firms or list on public markets. So 
far, at least, the agency’s innovations have 
struggled to leap into the real world. 

When ARPA-E began in 2009 the hope 
was that venture capitalists would pick up 
innovations emerging from it. They have 
proved reluctant. Energy technologies take 
far longer to reach the market than venture 
capital’s favourite investment, software. 
ARPA-E has thus tweaked the DARPA model 
to add a “tech-to-market” team, to guide 
projects through the industrial jungle. Last 
year it began handing out grants of up to 
$150,000 to promising previous award- 
winners seeking to grow. William Bonvil- 
lian, a science-policy expert at MIT, sus- 
pects one missing ingredient is simply 
time: “We created the internet in ’69. It 
didn’t scale up until ’91 or ’92. So we've just 
got to get used to it taking a while.” 

ARPA-H may face similar difficulties. It 
is based on the idea that the NIH is too con- 
servative, focusing on biology at a time 
when many life-science breakthroughs 
happen where biology, chemistry and 
computer science meet. Mikko Packalen 
and Jay Bhattacharya, of Waterloo and 
Stanford universities respectively, provide 
Supportive evidence, finding that the NIH’s 
funding of work building on new advances 
has declined. ARPA-H’s other goal, though, 
is to pump money into treatments for rare 
diseases, eschewed by the private sector 
because of limited moneymaking opportu- 
nities. AS with ARPA-E, this lack of com- 
mercial interest may make the transition 
from innovation to the real world tricky. 

Michael Stebbins, who was an Official 
in Barack Obama’s administration, and is 
an advocate for ARPA-H, hopes that some- 
one from DARPA can be recruited to lead 
the new agency. Replicating DARPA’s free- 
wheeling culture is such a challenging task 
that there have been times when DARPA it- 
self has failed. It went through a fallow per- 
iod in the late 1960s and early 1970s, and 
many feel its ambitions have been 
trimmed back in recent decades—min- 
imising failures, but also successes. 

The defence focus also has an inbuilt 
advantage. By failing to build a terrible 
weapon, American leaders can reassure 
themselves that their adversaries won't ei- 
ther. There is no such reassurance in fail- 
ing to cure cancer. But that has not been 
enough to dissuade politicians in America, 
Britain, Germany and Japan. The lesson 
many have learnt from DARPA is that mere 
difficulty is no reason to avoid something. 
It may even beareasontodoit. & 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Composing by computer 


Programmes by 
programs 


Concerts may soon feature music 
written by artificial intelligence 


HESE DAYS, anyone with a computer 
Tean be a composer. Sort of. Give a piece 
of commercial software such as Magenta, 
developed by Google, the first few notes of 
a song, and it will make something merrily 
tuneful out of them. Tuneful, but not so- 
phisticated. At least, that is the view of Ger- 
hard Widmer of Johannes Kepler Universi- 
ty, in Linz, Austria. 

In Dr Widmer’s opinion, “what they 
create may contain certain statistical prop- 
erties. It’s not dissonant, but it’s not actual- 
ly music...It would create a piece that 
would last three days because it has no no- 
tion of what it wants to do. It doesn’t know 
that things need an end, a beginning, and 
something in-between.” He thinks he can 
do better. He wants to use artificial intelli- 
gence to explore how toying with a listen- 
er’s expectations affects the perception of 
music, and then to employ that knowledge 
to create software which can produce 
something more akin to Beethoven than 
“Baa Baa Black Sheep”. That means giving 
computers an ability to perceive subtleties 
they cannot currently detect but might, us- 
ing the latest techniques, be able to learn. 
To this end, Dr Widmer is running a project 
called “Whither music?’—a title borrowed 
from a lecture series given at Harvard Uni- 


— 
r 





Play it again, Nikita 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


> versity in 1973 by Leonard Bernstein, a cele- 
brated 20th-century composer. 

When human beings listen to music, 
they subconsciously predict what the next 
note will be. One trick composers use is to 
toy with these expectations—sometimes 
delivering what is expected and some- 
times deliberately taking an unexpected 
turn. Performers then enhance that emo- 
tional manipulation by adding expres- 
sion—for example, by playing a particular 
phrase louder or more staccato than the 
one which came before. One thing Dr 
Widmer is doing, therefore, is teaching 
computers to copy them. 

To this end, he and his colleagues have 
amassed a huge body of recordings cap- 
tured on specially designed instruments, 
notably the BoOsendorfer 290 SE, a type of 
concert piano made in the 1980s which was 
rigged by the manufacturers with sensors 
that measure the force and timings of the 
pianist’s key-pressing with great accuracy. 
The jewel of their collection is a set of per- 
formances on a 290 SE by Nikita Magaloff 
(pictured), a legendary concert pianist and 
Chopin expert, of almost all of Chopin's so- 
lo piano work. These were recorded at a se- 
ries of six concerts which Magaloff gave in 
Vienna, shortly before his death in 1992. 

The team’s software takes data from 
these and other, humbler recordings and 
compares them with the score as written 
by the composer. It is looking for mis- 
matches between the two—places, for in- 
stance, where the performer misses the 
beat by a few milliseconds or plays a note 
more forcefully than the score indicates. 
By analysing thousands of performances 
and comparing them with digitised ver- 
sions of the composers’ scores, the soft- 
ware learns what performers are choosing 
to accentuate when they play, and thus 
what those performers think is particular- 
ly interesting to the audience. 

Other algorithms are being taught the 
rules of composition. “[Existing software 
models] take all the past notes that have al- 
ready been played and predict the next 
note, which has nothing to do with how a 
human composer would compose,’ Dr 
Widmer explains. “Composition is a plan- 
ning process that involves structure. We 
want to create models that make predic- 
tions at several levels simultaneously.” The 
team are designing and training individual 
modules for different elements of music: 
melody, rhythm, harmony and so on— 
with the intention of combining them into 
a master program that can be trained on 
performances and scores in toto. 

Once complete, the resulting megabyte 
maestro will decide not just which note 
follows which, but why that should be so 
and how that note should be played. “In- 
Stead of saying, ‘the next note is statistical- 
ly likely to be a C’,, it would say, ‘I believe 
that the next four bars will feature some 


kind of IV-I-V harmony [a common type of 
chord progression in Western music], be- 
cause we had a similar pattern in a similar 
melodic context earlier in the piece”.” 

Software of this sort might have appli- 
cations beyond composition. Existing 
“recommender” algorithms struggle to 
generate musical playlists that appeal to 
particular tastes. A recent paper showed 
that they are good at suggesting pieces for 
fans of pop music with catholic appetites, 
but not for those who prefer a specific 
genre, such as heavy metal or rap. Software 
that understands musical expectancy 
might do a better job. A program which 
knows what to listen out for might discov- 
er that the music of Skepta or Slayer has 
specific types of musical surprises within 
it, and, on this basis, beable to recommend 
new music with similar surprises. 

Whether computer software will ever 
be able to write music that stands up to 
comparison with the likes of Chopin or 
Cream remains to be seen. Dr Widmer re- 
mains sceptical, but it is hard to see why. 
Great art is often a product of knowing 
when to obey the rules and when to break 
them. And that is exactly what he is teach- 
ing his machines. @ 














Cicadas, insecticides and children 


A brooding 
problem 


The return of periodical cicadas bodes 
ill for children’s well-being 


S SUMMER APPROACHES, adults of cica- 

da Brood X, last seen in 2004, have be- 
gun emerging in the eastern United States. 
Their return is welcome news for entomol- 
ogists who study them, and for adventur- 
ous chefs in search of novel ingredients. It 
could, though, have bad consequences for 
unborn infants and young children in the 
places where they live. 

The cicadas themselves are harmless to 
people, but their nymphs feed on the roots 
of woody plants such as apple trees. Farm- 
ers, understandably peeved by their unin- 
vited guests, respond by spraying those 
trees with large quantities of pesticides to 
stop the adults mating. This chemical war- 
fare successfully curbs the insects, but, ac- 
cording to new working paper by Charles 
Taylor of Columbia University, it may also 
have adverse consequences for children. 

Mr Taylor, who studies environmental 
and health economics, started his investi- 
gation by collecting, on a county-by-coun- 
ty basis, data stretching back from 2016 to 
1950 for the parts of America where period- 
ical cicadas live. There are, altogether, 15 
such broods; 12 of them emerge as adults 


Science & technology 69 


Cicadian rhythm 
US, change in infant mortality in apple-growing 
counties, deaths per 1,000 births, 1995-2016 


0.6 

J. 0.3 

ny | =e ————— 

= 

a -0.3 

»— 95% confidence interval -0.6 

| € Before | After > -0.9 
jane RUG [tains © Souies (oa) ACC coin” Cs 


Years before/after cicada brood appears 


Source: “Cicadian rhythm: insecticides, infant health and 
long-term outcomes’, C. A. Taylor, CEEP working paper, 2021 


every 17 years (of which Brood X Is the larg- 
est) and three every 13 years, ina phenome- 
non known as predator swamping. Lacking 
good information on pesticide use, Mr Tay- 
lor used the abundance of apple trees ina 
county as a proxy for how much of the stuff 
farmers were likely to deploy in a brood 
year. He also studied local health and edu- 
cation records for brood years and non- 
brood years. The results are disturbing. 

Mr Taylor’s analysis found that in the 
year immediately after the emergence of 
periodical cicadas, infant-mortality rates 
would increase by 0.3 deaths per 1,000 live 
births in counties which have lots of apple 
trees (see chart). That represents a 5% in- 
crease over America’s national rate of six 
deaths per 1,000 births. No such change 
was seen in non-apple-growing counties. 

Cicada-driven pesticide spikes seem to 
harm cognitive development, too. Prim- 
ary-school pupils (those aged roughly 
eight to ten) who lived in counties which 
Saw emergences of periodical cicadas 
while those children were in their moth- 
ers’ wombs later fared worse than others 
on standardised exams. Mr Taylor esti- 
mates that these pupils, in effect, lose 
around 10% of a grade-year’s-worth of 
learning. The study finds, too, that high- 
school pupils are around 5% more likely to 
drop out of school in their 12th grade (ie, at 
the age of 17-18) if they live in a county that 
was affected by a cicada event 19 years ear- 
lier, when they were in utero. That suggests 
pesticide use does indeed hurt long-term 
cognitive development. 

Mr Taylor's study focuses on the use of 
pesticides on a single crop, apples, against 
a single foe, cicadas. If his results are accu- 
rate, they suggest that quite modest expo- 
sure to pesticides can have a serious effect 
on unborn infants—for even in counties 
where apples are an important crop, or- 
chards cover only a small fraction of the 
land, meaning that tree-spraying is not 
dumping huge amounts of pesticides into 
the environment. What that implies for the 
effects of other, more extensive pesticide 
uses would certainly bear investigation. ™ 


70 Science & technology 


Forensic science 
Where were you on 
Thursday the 15th? 


Testing alibis is not as straightforward 
as it seems 


N 1985 RONALD COTTON, a resident of 

North Carolina, was falsely convicted of 
rape and burglary, and sentenced to life 
imprisonment. Nearly a decade later, he 
was exonerated on the basis of DNA evVI- 
dence. Not only did the victim make an er- 
ror in identifying him as the perpetrator, 
but Mr Cotton had also provided an alibi 
that could not be corroborated. 

This, it turned out, was because he was 
wrong about where he had been when the 
crime was committed. A subsequent inves- 
tigation showed that he had, in error, in- 
stead told the police where he was at that 
time on the same day during the week be- 
fore. An unfortunate confusion, then, with 
serious consequences. But, if research just 
published in Psychological Science is to be 
believed, one that might be commoner 
than imagined. 

Aware of Mr Cotton’s case, and of esti- 
mates that about 1% of America’s prison 
population are innocent of the offences 
they are serving time for, Yim Hyungwook 
of Hanyang University, in South Korea, and 
Simon Dennis of the University of Mel- 
bourne, in Australia, wanted to understand 
better how people remember details about 
where they were when in the past. They 
hoped they would thus be able to identify 
common mistakes that people make about 
such matters, so that they could bring 
these to the attention of detectives and de- 
fence lawyers, and therefore help keep in- 
nocent people out of jail. 

To this end, they recruited 51 volunteers 
and asked them to download an app onto 
their smartphones, to collect information 
about their lives over the course of four 
weeks. The app tracked the phone's loca- 
tion using GPS, and made recordings, from 
time to time, of nearby sounds. 

Aweek after the experiment ended, par- 
ticipants were asked to take a memory test. 
They were presented with electronic maps 
that had four markers on them, and were 
asked 72 questions of the form, “click the 
marker where you were on Thursday 
morning 8am on August 15th”. They were 
allowed to zoom into the maps and take a 
look at the names of streets and venues in 
the area, but were not allowed to use the 
“street view” facility or to refer to any other 
information, such as past appointments 
noted on the calendar of their phone. After 
selecting a marker, they were asked to rate 
how confident of their answer they were, 
on a Scale that ranged from one (not at all 


confident) to five (very confident). 

Dr Yim and Dr Dennis found that partic- 
ipants got things wrong about a third of the 
time, and further examination of the data 
revealed that these errors were not ran- 
dom. People were more likely to remember 
events incorrectly if they were similar in 
time or space than they were if they were 
not. Specifically, they chose the right day of 
the week but the wrong week 19% of the 
time, and the right hour of the day but the 
wrong day 8% of the time. 

Analysis of the audio files revealed that 
they were also more likely to make errors 
when two locations had similar acoustic 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


environments. And when participants 
were confident of their answer, they were 
almost always right, and when they were 
not at all confident, they were much more 
likely to be wrong. 

None of these findings is, it is true, that 
Surprising. But they are, nevertheless, nov- 
el—and are the sorts of things that detec- 
tives and lawyers need to be aware of. How 
common it is for mistaken imprisonment, 
or worse, to happen as it did to Mr Cotton 
on the basis of alibi claims that could not 
be proved because they were themselves 
mistakes, is unknown. But that is because, 
until now, no one has had reason toask. @ 


Sweetness and light 


A popular fruit started off in Darfur 


HE ORIGINS of some crops are well 

known. Maize derives from a wild 
grass growing in the Balsas river valley, 
in what is now Mexico. Rice descends 
from another grass, native to the Yangzi 
basin. Potatoes hail from the border 
between Peru and Bolivia. Apples trace 
back to the woodlands of southern Kaz- 
akhstan. Some crops’ beginnings, 
though, are lost in the mists of time— 
among them those of the watermelon. 

That watermelons’ ancestors are 
African has long been clear. Archaeolog- 
ical evidence from Libya and Egypt sug- 
gests they were cultivated there thou- 
sands of years ago, and the continent is 
home to seven species and numerous 
subspecies of plants classified in the 
Same genus, Citrullus, as the cultivated 
crop. But only now has a likely candidate 
been nailed down. An examination of 
available genetic data about members of 
Citrullus, published in the Proceedings of 


-Atable fit fora pha raoh 


the National Academy of Sciences by Su- 
Sanne Renner of Washington University, 
in St Louis, and Guillaume Chomicki of 
the University of Sheffield, in Britain, has 
led them to conclude that watermelons 
were domesticated from a subspecies 
called the Sudanese Kordofan melon, 
which grows in Darfur, the western part 
of Sudan. 

Tellingly, this is one of the few wild 
members of Citrullus that is bland, rather 
than excruciatingly bitter to the human 
palate. That ties in with a reinterpreta- 
tion by the two researchers of a 4,450- 
year-old Egyptian tomb painting (pic- 
tured). The previous assumption had 
been that early cultivated watermelons 
were too bitter to eat raw, and would thus 
need to be cooked and sweetened for 
consumption. This painting, though, 
shows what appears to be a stripped 
watermelon being served raw ata table 
decorated by lotus flowers. 





Return of the repressed 


AMSTERDAM 


An exhibition in the Netherlands illuminates the country’s history of slavery 


N 1881SOMEONE donated an antique brass 
Lcirctet to the Rijksmuseum, the Dutch 
national museum of art and history. The 
object (pictured) is a bit of a stumper. En- 
graved with a heraldic shield and the year 
1689, it bears no indication of what pur- 
pose it served. The museum staff listed it 
as a dog collar. 

They could have investigated more 
thoroughly. Scattered through the Rijks- 
museum's collection are paintings show- 
ing similar collars worn not by dogs, but by 
young black men. Referred to as “Moors’, 
they were routinely kept as servants in 
wealthy 17th-century Dutch households, a 
sideline of the vast European human-traf- 
ficking operation that carried millions of 
enslaved Africans to the Americas. 

Slavery was not a distant memory in 
1881. On some Dutch colonial plantations it 
had ended just a decade earlier. Yet a cura- 
tor at the Rijksmuseum apparently failed 
to make the connection. Had Dutch society 
really forgotten such objects? Or was it try- 
ing not to see them? 

The collaris on display in the museum’s 
new exhibition on the history of enslave- 


ment in the Netherlands and its former 
colonies. (King Willem-Alexander opened 
the exhibition in May, but the museum re- 
mains closed until June 5th due to covid-19 
restrictions.) It is part of a broad move- 
ment to re-examine the country’s colonial 
past. The Netherlands ruled Indonesia, Su- 
riname, Curacao and several other Carib- 
bean islands from the 1600s until the 
mid-2oth century, first through its East In- 
dia and West India Companies (the voc 
and Gwc) and later directly. Slaves la- 
boured on coffee, spice and sugar planta- 
tions through to the 1860s. During their 
Golden Age of painters and tulips, the 
Dutch were among the world’s leading 
Slavers, conquering forts in west Africa to 
seize the trade from the Portuguese. 

In modern times the Dutch have played 


72 Improving decision-making 
73 Johnson: Gender-neutral language 


74 The powerful postal service 





down this history. But that has become 
harder as the Netherlands has grown more 
multicultural. The biggest Dutch immi- 
grant communities come from Morocco 
and Turkey, but those from Suriname, the 
Caribbean and Indonesia make up about 
5% of the population. Arguments over 
“Zwarte Piet” (a blackface tradition associ- 
ated with the St Nicholas Day holiday) and 
Black Lives Matter have riven Dutch poli- 
tics. For the Rijksmuseum, bringing the 
other side of the colonial past into view isa 
condition for staying relevant. 

One challenge in staging an exhibition 
on slavery is a lack of physical material. 
“Enslaved people were not allowed to own 
objects, they were not allowed to write, 
they were hardly ever depicted,’ says Vali- 
ka Smeulders, the Rijksmuseum’s chief 
historian, who hails from Curacao. The 
museum redresses this by uncovering trac- 
es in its collection that had gone unno- 
ticed. In Bartholomeus van der Helst’s 
painting of an Amsterdam shooting com- 
pany from 1639, an unidentified black 
youth stands at the centre. Rembrandt's 
opulent portraits of Marten Soolmans and 
Oopjen Coppit are well known; less so is 
that their wealth came in part from the 
Slave-driven sugar trade. 

A second technique is to examine 
everyday objects from the slave economy, 
such as plantation bells. For slaves they 
could be a relief or an omen, signalling the 
end of the day and the weighing of the har- 
vest, which might presage a beating if the 
quota was not met. The logo of the Gwe, a| 


Books & arts 


>» nostalgic sight on old canal houses in 
Dutch cities, takes on a different aura once 
you have seen it on a branding iron used on 
humans. Other objects testify to the perse- 
verance of enslaved people: a botanist’s 
samples from Suriname in 1687 include 
sesame and okra, African crops that must 
have been planted by captives. Oral history 
adds another layer. Songs from Suriname, 
Curacao and South Africa (originally a 
Dutch colony) sound like lullabies, until 
you hear the translations. Shon ta bende 
nos, mama, katibu ta galina: “The landlord 
sells us, mama, slaves are chickens.” 

The exhibition is structured around the 
Stories of ten individuals, five connected 
to the functioning of the slave system and 
five embodying resistance against it. The 
direct testimony of Wally, a slave in Surina- 
me, exists because he was interrogated in 
court. He and four others were gruesomely 
executed in 1707 after they ran off into the 
jungle in protest at tough new work rules. 
Works by Dirk Valkenburg, a painter dis- 
patched by the absentee owner in Amster- 
dam to record his plantation, provide visu- 
al context. Valkenburg’s depiction of what 
looks like a holiday celebration is magnifi- 
cent: the revellers leap from the canvas, in- 
dividual and compelling. It is all the more 
shocking to read that this seemingly empa- 
thetic painter had condemned Wally, call- 
ing him a “troublemaker”. 

Some of the history in the exhibition is 
path-breaking. The Dutch tend to identify 
Slavery with the Americas, but another 
huge branch of the trade shipped captives 
from the Ganges delta to Indonesia, 
whence they might be sold on to South Af- 
rica or occasionally the Netherlands itself. 
The attention to enslaved Africans and 
Asians in Holland is new, too. Slavery was 
illegal in the Dutch homeland, but slaves 
brought there remained in servitude, per- 
haps because they had few options. 

Some found their way into Dutch soci- 
ety nonetheless. One was Paulus Maurus, a 
servant of the wealthy Nassau La Lecq clan, 
an offshoot of the Dutch royal family. 
Church records show that he became a cav- 
alry drummer in the regiment of the Neth- 
erlands’ top commander, and that he mar- 
ried a Dutch woman in 1684 and had a 
child. A painting of Dutch cavalry decades 
later shows just such a mounted black 
drummer, wearing what seems to be a met- 
al collar. Indeed, the engraved shield on 
the brass collar from 1689 seems to belong 
to the house of Nassau La Lecq. The case is 
circumstantial, but it may have been Mau- 
rus who wore it. 

What drove this system was money. The 
exhibition could do with a bit more eco- 
nomics, but it makes clear that the finan- 
cial incentives were immense. In 1621 Jan 
Pieterszoon Coen, an officer of the Voc, 
massacred 14,000 of the 15,000 inhabitants 
of the Moluccan island of Great Banda, at 


the time the world’s chief source of nut- 
meg, and replaced them with imported 
Slaves. He did so to secure a monopoly ona 
spice that sold for hundreds of times as 
much in Europe as in South-East Asia. 

All this is grim, but it is also riveting. 
That makes the relative unfamiliarity of 
the history of slavery, a central aspect of 
European colonialism, even harder to ex- 
plain. Many Europeans feel that slavery 
gets too much attention, that it took place 
long ago and has nothing to do with them. 
The resentment gives away the game. In 
the colonial age, the voices of slaves were 
silenced because hearing them might up- 
end the socioeconomic system. Later, they 
were silenced because hearing them 
makes the heirs of that system feel guilty. 
Yet as psychotherapists know, the truth is 
more interesting than the silences and fa- 
bles under which it is concealed. & 


Decision-making 


Noise pollution 





Noise. By Daniel Kahneman, Olivier Sibony 
and Cass Sunstein. Little, Brown; 464 pages; 
$32. William Collins; £25 


OISE IS UNWANTED Variation in judg- 
ments that should be identical, which 
leads to inaccurate and unfair decisions. It 
is all around people all the time, though in- 
dividuals fail to notice it. To get a sense of 
how it happens, perform a “noise audit” 
right now: open your phone's stopwatch 
app and practice counting ten seconds. 
Now, with your eyes closed, count several 
times, hitting the lap button each time you 
believe ten seconds have elapsed. 
Your answers weren't perfect but noisy: 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


Slightly above or below the ten-second 
mark. And if they were consistently wrong 
in one direction, then there is bias too, 
which is a different form of error (you 
counted too quickly or slowly). 

The problem of bias in decisions is well 
known and there are strategies that people 
can adopt to minimise it. For example, cus- 
tomers may be “anchored” on the first 
price they are presented with in a transac- 
tion, so they learn to consciously discard it 
before they negotiate. But noise is different 
precisely because it is less apparent. “It be- 
comes visible only when we think statisti- 
cally about an ensemble of similar judg- 
ments. Indeed, it then becomes hard to 
miss,’ Daniel Kahneman, Olivier Sibony 
and Cass Sunstein write in their new book. 

The divergences are stark. In a court- 
house in Miami, one judge would grant ref- 
ugees asylum in 88% of cases while anoth- 
er would do so 5% of the time. A large study 
of radiologists found that the false-posi- 
tive rate ranged from 1% to 64%, meaning 
that two-thirds of the time, a radiologist 
Said a mammogram showed cancer when 
it was not cancerous. Doctors are more 
likely to prescribe opioids at the end of a 
long day. Judges made harsher decisions 
leading up to their breaks and on hotter 
days. An insurance firm’s underwriters as- 
sessed premiums that varied by 55%, a dif- 
ference that was five times greater than its 
management had imagined. 

Not only do individuals differ with 
their peers, they often fail to agree with 
themselves. Wine experts tasting the same 
samples for a second time scored fewer 
than one in five identically. Four out of five 
fingerprint examiners altered their origi- 
nal identification decision when present- 
ed with contextual information that 
should not have been a factor in matching 
prints. In one medical study, assessing an- 
giograms, physicians disagreed with their 
earlier judgments more than half the time. 

Noise is sometimes good. When differ- 


ent investors size up a trade or book re- >» 





The Economist June 5th 2021 


>» viewers reach different assessments, the 
diversity of opinion is beneficial. But more 
commonly it creates problems. In law 
noise means unfairness. In business it can 
be costly. 

Yet it can be reduced. The authors’ rem- 
edies include a “noise audit” to measure 
the degree of disagreement on the same 
cases, to quantify the variation that is usu- 
ally invisible. They also call for better “de- 
cision hygiene” such as designating an ob- 
server for group decisions, to prevent com- 
mon biases and noisy judgments. For ex- 
ample, they can ensure that participants in 


a team reach independent assessments be- 
fore coming together as a group to aggre- 
gate their decisions. 

Another solution is to dispense with 
people altogether. Statistical models, pre- 
determined rules and algorithms in many 
cases are more accurate than human judg- 
ment. The authors welcome artificial intel- 
ligence to make many decisions in society, 
but acknowledge that people are predis- 
posed to resisting their answers, for lack of 
the personal, emotional quality in deci- 
sion-making—even if it leads to inferior, or 
at least variable, decisions. 


One giant leap for humankind 


Google intervenes in the argument about masculine generics 


N THE 1990S parodies of Clippy from 

Microsoft Word were a bit of a trend in 
cartoons and magazines. The annoying 
paper-clip-shaped figure would pop up 
as soon as you began writing “Dear...” and 
say: “It looks like you're writing a letter,” 
before offering unsolicited advice on 
things such as formatting. 

Two decades later, various automatic 
aids to writing, including spelling and 
grammar-checkers, are much better. 
They are both more discerning—po- 
wered by artificial intelligence rather 
than manually programmed—and more 
subtle in their operations. Many writers 
are grateful for their interventions. 

But now tech companies are wading 
into trickier waters. In 2020 Google’s 
internal style guide was updated, en- 
couraging developers to eschew “unnec- 
essarily gendered language’ in their 
documentation. Rather than referring to 
“man hours”, for example, a coder might 
discuss the “person hours” involved ina 
project. “All of mankind” could be re- 
placed with “all of humanity”, the guide’s 
authors suggested. 

On May 18th the company announced 
that it was going further in its promotion 
of inclusive language. Google Docs, its 
popular free word-processing software, 
would soon be nudging people away 
from potentially sexist language, such as 
the generic use of “chairman”. Instead it 
will offer gender-neutral suggestions 
including “chairperson”. 

The tech company is right toseea 
problem. Though it doesn't fit in the 
Same category as spelling errors or gram- 
matical quandaries, sexist bias is shot 
through the English language, as well as 
others. Consider the lack of female 
equivalent for “master” that lacks un- 
pleasant secondary meanings. “Slut” and 
“whore’ are the types of slurs so gen- 


60" 





dered they are rarely hurled at men. 

Google’s target, though, is the so-called 
generic masculine. For a long time Eng- 
lish-language traditionalists said that “the 
masculine includes the feminine”. Under 
this rule, “everyone has his own opinion” 
is gender-neutral, and there is nothing 
wrong with generic chairmen, airmen and 
firemen. (In other languages, mixed or 
unknown persons are referred to in the 
masculine, too.) But using words like 
“chairman” and “sex-neutral ‘he’” are not 
truly gender-neutral: a stack of research 
proves that when people read those terms 
they are much more likely to picturea 
man than a woman. 

In some European countries, feminists 
have called for feminised job titles, so that 
a woman president in Spain is now “la 
presidenta’” and not “el presidente”. But 
Anglophone feminists have argued the 
other way, abjuring rather than recom- 
mending specific, feminised titles like 
poetess and actress. And this does not 
solve the problem of what to do witha 
generic referent, where languages still 
tend to default to the masculine. 


Books &arts 73 


The trio speaks with credibility. Mr 
Kahneman is a Nobel laureate whose ideas 
on bias in human reasoning have reshaped 
economics and society; Mr Sunstein is a 
polymath scholar at Harvard and occasion- 
al government official putting his ideas in- 
to policy; Mr Sibony is a former McKinsey 
partner who teaches decision science at a 
French business school. Yet despite the 
book's title, the authors struggled to extract 
the signal from the noise, so to speak, 
needing some 400 pages to make their 
case. A tighter argument would have en- 
hanced the ideas they present. @ 





A solution in English is to prefer 
newer, genderless titles like “mail carri- 
er’ and “police officer”. But even here 
there are difficulties. Some titles seem 
especially ugly in this form: no one 
seems to love (and therefore want to 
adopt) “chairperson” and even though 
“chair” is fine for some observers, others 
cannot see past the piece of furniture. 
There is further disagreement over 
whether such forms should be universal 
or whether it is acceptable to calla male 
officer a “policeman”. 

With this much unsettled, tech com- 
panies are walking a difficult line. There 
is growing acceptance that sexist lan- 
guage is a problem; at the same time, 
there is also a widespread belief that the 
tech giants are becoming too powerful, 
and are making policy decisions that are 
momentous in users’ daily lives without 
enough clarity or insight into how those 
decisions were reached. 

All big companies are under increas- 
ing pressure not just to sell their widgets 
but to take a stance on the hot-button 
issues of the day. Often they find that 
trying to please one constituency out- 
rages another; trying later to split the 
difference outrages the first one again, 
and so on. Companies that make coffee 
machines or shoes have already run into 
these problems. When the tech giants 
weigh in on politics, their huge influence 
virtually guarantees a backlash from one 
party or another. 

There are good things tech companies 
can do for inclusivity: at the same con- 
ference at which the language changes 
were announced, Google said it would 
improve its smartphone cameras’ han- 
dling of black and brown skin. But in 
language, the solutions are less obvi- 
ous—even among people who agree on 
the problem. 


714 


Books & arts 


a bend O6 Sete 
‘fue vt oi 


Going postal 


OSTOF FICE 





How the West was won 


A new book offers a timely reminder that the post has always been political 





Paper Trails. By Cameron Blevins. 
Oxford University Press; 248 pages; 
$34.95 and £22.99 


EFORE COLORADO was a territory, let 
Batone a State, it had post offices. The 
first opened in 1859 in Auraria, a mining 
settlement founded by migrants from the 
South searching for gold. Life could be un- 
predictable west of the Mississippi. Gold 
failed to materialise, drought ruined farm- 
ers and settlers clashed with Native Amer- 
icans. Soon Auraria merged with a rival 
company town—Denver City. Today a 
Sprawling university campus stands on its 
location. Amid all the upheaval, argues 
Cameron Blevins, a historian at the Uni- 
versity of Colorado-Denver, one feature re- 
mained constant: the postal service. 

Rather than focusing on ideas that were 
spread by the post, in “Paper Trails” Mr Ble- 
vins considers the infrastructure of the 
agency itself. Using a database compiled by 
Richard Helbock, a postal historian, he 
charts the rapid opening and closure of 
post offices in the second half of the 19th 
century—thereby tracing America’s west- 
ward expansion. 

The maps in the book are telling. I1n1864 
there were few branches on land con- 
trolled by Native Americans, which still ac- 
counted for most of the West. Over the next 
25 years, as indigenous people were killed 
or forced onto government reservations, 
the dots representing post offices multiply 
exponentially (see map). Using these as a 


proxy for settlement, Mr Blevins regards 
colonisation of the West as a result of big 
government rather than rugged individ- 
ualism. As federal subsidies and land 
grants coaxed easterners into the moun- 
tains, deserts and high plains of Indian 
Country, the post kept them connected. 

In the mid-19th century the Post Office 
Department (as the United States Postal 
Service was formerly known) was far from 
a centralised bureaucracy. To keep up with 
migration patterns, postal services were 
grafted onto existing businesses. The fed- 
eral government commissioned private 
stagecoaches to carry the mail, and granted 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


short-term contracts to local businessmen 
(and sometimes women) to act as town 
postmasters. These flexible partnerships 
enabled the mail quickly to follow mi- 
grants, helping knit together far-flung 
parts of a vast country. 

“Paper Trails” is a reminder that, long 
before the recent wrangles over postal vot- 
ing, the post was political. Until 1971 the 
postal service was a cabinet-level depart- 
ment in the executive branch, and jobs 
within it were doled out as patronage. Of 
the 80,000 appointments submitted to the 
Senate for approval between 1829 and 1917, 
nearly 62,000 were for post-office jobs. 
The facilities themselves were often 
turned into de facto campaign headquar- 
ters where partisans wooed voters. Con- 
gressmen were frequently caught up in 
rows over who should be postmasters in 
their districts. A friend of Jules Sandoz, a 
Nebraska postmaster, voiced his exaspera- 
tion with postal politicking: “Why did you 
have to spend your whole life fighting over 
stupid things like post offices, Jules?” 

For all that, the existence of the 19th- 
century postal service was not itself divi- 
sive. Democrats and Republicans alike 
stuffed the department with supporters; to 
please constituents, congressmen from 
both parties sought more routes in their 
districts. Today the post remains popular: 
last year 91% of Americans viewed the 
agency favourably. Yet Donald Trump and 
Republican legislators were contemptuous 
of it, and of postal voting in particular. 

One of the most striking aspects of “Pa- 
per Trails” isn’t in the book. Mr Blevins isa 
digital historian, meaning he uses data Ssci- 
ence to analyse historical trends. He built 
an accompanying website replete with in- 
teractive maps to show readers how, with- 
in a generation, the postal service helped 
colonise a continent. These online dis- 
patches beautifully illustrate the formative 
power of snail mail. & 





Go West, young postman 
United States, post offices* in the West 


~ Native American reservations 


~ Unceded Native American land 





1864 


1889 


*Post offices for which exact locations could not be determined are randomly distributed 


Source: Cameron Blevins, Oxford University Press 


within the county in which they operated and are displayed in a lighter colour 


Conferences 


FUTURE * TALENT 
CONFERENCE 


2021 


GLOBAL & 
VIRTUAL 


The must-attend 
global event 
about the future 
of work for 
thousands of 
professionals Author & 
Psychologist 





IN PARTNERSHIP WITH: 





TRANSFORMING SKILLS * 
AND INCLUSION 


Thursday 24th & Friday 25th June 2021 


Matthew Syed FrancescaGino David Olusoga Nilofer Merchant 
Professor, Harvard 
Business School 


Author 
& Speaker 


Historian, Writer 
& Broadcaster 


FINSBURY 
| It GLOVER 
HERING 





Tenders 


Investhi¢ 


The Government of the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region 


Your chance to represent Hong Kong 
Asia’s Premier Business Hub 


Tender Invitation for the provision of Investment Promotion Support Services 
for Invest Hong Kong (InvestHK) 


Hong Kong is one of the world’s most dynamic, vibrant and international cities. As a leading 
international financial centre, Hong Kong is a premier business hub for companies expanding 
business in Asia and tapping into fast-growing opportunities in the Guangdong-Hong Kong- 
Macau Greater Bay Area, ASEAN and under the Belt and Road initiative. 


InvestHK is the department of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Government 
responsible for Foreign Direct Investment, supporting overseas and Mainland businesses to set 
up and expand in Hong Kong. 


InvestHK invites companies in India, Israel, Nordics and West Japan with experience in 
investment promotion, economic development, or international business development to 
submit a tender for the provision of the following services in the markets of India, Israel, 


Nordics and West Japan. 


To act as a representative office of InvestHK and actively promote Hong Kong as a 
premier business location in Asia 

To identify target companies in priority sectors and markets through desk research, 
networking, attendance of conferences and exhibitions 

To respond to enquiries from potential investors by providing timely advice and practical 
assistance 

To develop and implement annual business plans for promoting inward investment to 
Hong Kong and to achieve key performance indicators 

To organise and support investment promotion visits by InvestHK head office teams 

To develop links and networks with business multiplier organisations and the media 


Interested Companies please send an email in English to IPConsultant @investhk.gov.hk to 
obtain the password to download the respective Tender Document from the “Tender Notices” 
section of InvestHK website www.investhk.gov.hk. The tender for the markets of India, Israel 
and Nordics must be submitted in English by /2:00 noon, 28 June 2021 (HKT); for the market 
of West Japan, the tender in English must be submitted by 12:00 noon, 29 June 2021 (HKT). 
Any late response will not be considered. For detailed information about the submission 
procedure, please refer to the Tender Document. Companies which do not hear from InvestHK 
by 30 November 2021 should consider their bids unsuccessful. 


For further information on InvestHK, please visit our website at www.InvestHK.gov.hk. 





REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH & WELLNESS 


HSCCMauntusEYE20 NOTICE INVITING TENDER (NIT) Date: 31.05.2021 


Ministry of Health & Wellness, Republic of Mauritius invites international bids on item rate basis 
through their Consultants HSCC (India) Limited from etigible contractors/firms for the following works 


Name & | Estimated Cost| Tender Documents available for | Bid Security 
Description (in Mauritian | sale and Last date of submission — (in Mauritian 
of Work | Rupees) A opening of Tender Ru pees) 
Construction of 737.17 From 07.06.2021 to 08.07.2021 upto 8.37 
Eye Hospital at Million 15:00 hrs and opening on 06.07 2021 Million 
Mauritius. at 15:30 hrs. 
Completion period is 18 calendar months. 


For tender details, please refer detailed NIT on HSCC website http:/\www.hsccltd.co.in, 
https://www.dgmarket.com and Republic of Mauritius websites www.health.govmu.org and 
publicprocurement govmu.org. The pre-bid meeting shall be held on 21.06.2021 at 15:00 hrs at 
Consultant's Office —- HSCC India Limited, E- 6(A), Sector-1, NOIDA- 201301, Uttar Pradesh, India 
For bid submission and other details refer to the detailed NIT 


Ministry of Health & Welinass, Republic of Mauritius’) HSCC reserves the night to accept or rejectany 
bid, and to annul the bidding process and reject all bids al any time prior to contract award, wilhoul 
thereby incurring any liability to Bidders 


Prospective bidders are advised to regularly scan through HSCC website htip:/www.hsccltd.co.in, 
hitps://www.dgmarkel.com, www.heallh.govmu.org, and publicprocurement.govmu.org as 
corigendum/amendments etc., if any, will be notified on this portal only and separate advertisement 


will not be made for this. 
Deputy Permanent Secretary, 
REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS, MINISTRY OF HEALTH & WELLNESS 





Announcements 


Call for Papers: 
African Economic Conference 2021 


Ploase submit your paper to 
Fot more information 





75 





7 Economic & financial indicators 


Economic data 


United States 
China 
Japan 
Britain 
Canada 
Euro area 
Austria 
Belgium 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Italy 
Netherlands 
Spain 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Norway 
Poland 
Russia 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Turkey 
Australia 
Hong Kong 
India 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Pakistan 
Philippines 
Singapore 
South Korea 
Taiwan 
Thailand _ 
Argentina 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Mexico 
Peru 
Egypt 
Israel 
Saudi Arabia 
South Africa 























Gross domestic product 











Consumer prices 


Unemployment 










































































% change on year ago % change on yearago |rate 
latest quarter* 20217 latest 2021T | % 
| o: rer 6.0 4.2 Apr 27 6.1. Apr 
ores Q1 2.4 8.5 0.9 Apr 1.6 5.1 Apri 
Sei -5.1 LD) -0.5 Apr 0.1 2.8 Apr 
-6.1 Qi -59 oho 1.5. Apr 1.5 48 Febtt 
om 1 5.6 5.4 3.4 Apr 2.2 8.1 Apr 
18 Qi -2.5 41 2.0 May 1.4 8.0 Apr 
omQi -12.6 3.4 2.8 May 1.7 5.6 Apr 
-0.6 Qi 42 3.9 ieee May 1.5 5.3. Apr 
1.2 Qi -04 5.4 1.4 May 13 7.3 Apr 
SeemQi = -/.0 35 2.5 May 1.9 44 Apr 
59 Q4 = 11.1 o5 -0.3 Apr nil 15.8 Dec 
-0.8 Qi 0.6 41 1.3 May 1.0 10.7 Apr 
28 Qi -18 29 1.9 Apr 2.0 3.4 Apr 
43 a1 -2.1 5.6 2.6 May 1.3 15.4 Apr 
24 Qi -1.0 37 Salem Apr J. 3.4 Aprt 
-13 Q1. -5.1 3.0 1.5. Apr 0.7 4.6 Apr 
-14 qi -2.5 2.6 Seem Apr 1.6 4.6 Feb## 
i 45 41 48 May 3.2 6.3 Aprs 
-1.0 ai na SZ Bee Apr aye 5.2 Ape 
-0.1 QI 3.4 35 2.2 Apr 1.4 9.4 Aprs 
mQi =—-2.0 2.6 om Apr 0.3 Sy Nar 
oie na 3.9 eee Apr 14.5 13.1. Mar8 
ie 1 The 3.4 len 1 2.1 5.5 Apr 
memo) (23.5 49 eee Apr 1.6 6.4 Aprt# 
om Q1 6.0 10.4 4.3 Apr ee 11.9 May 
-0.7 Qi na 3.9 ee May 25 6.3 Qis 
ee 1 na 44 4.7 Apr 2.4 4.7 Mars 
47 2021** na ]./ 10.9 May 9.0 5.8 2018 
-42 Qi ‘ey ell 4.5 Apr 5.0 ed Oule 
memQ)= «(13.1 48 oaee Apr 1.8 29.01 
1.7 QI 6.6 3.6 2.6 May 1.9 40 Apr 
oe) 129 6.2 alee Apr 1.6 3.7 Apr 
emi ——C 0. 7p 3.4 Apr Jeg 1.5  Dec8 
-43 24 19.4 6.2 46.3 Aprt 46.8 11.0 Qa4s 
oe 1 49 42 6.8 Apr 6.8 14.7 MarS# 
03 a1 13.4 G2 3.3. Apr 3.6 10.2 AprS# 
Amoi 119 48 1.9 Apr 2.6 15.1 Apr8 
-3.6 QI 3.1 5./ 6.1 Apr 45 4.7 Apr 
38 qr 83105 2A May 26 12.6 Ap 
eee 04 na 29 4.1 Apr 5./ 7A ais 
SeeeQi = -6.5 40 0.8 Apr eS 5h 
-41 2020 na 2.9 5.3. Apr 2.4 TA Q4 
ee 4 SGD a 4.5 Apr oY 32.6 ais 


Current-account 


balance 





-2.9 
Za 
a0 

-4.2 

-2.0 
She 
3.4 

-0.8 

-1.8 
6.8 

-5.8 
3.0 

10.8 
ies 
2 
7A 
2.4 
20 
3.6 
4. 
6.9 

-2.2 
1.9 
36 

-1.0 

-0.3 
4./ 

-1.7 

-1.1 

16.7 
46 

5.5 
45 
(Lf 

-0.2 

-0.2 

-3.3 
2.0 

-0.3 

-3.3 
3.4 
xe: 

ari 








% of GDP, 2021T 








The Economist June 5th 2021 















































| Budget Interest rates Currency units 
balance 10-yr gov'tbonds —changeon per $ % change 
% of GDP, 2021 latest,% year ago, bp Jun2nd  onyear ago 
~-135 1.6 91.0 - 
-47 2.9 8 59.0 6.39 Iles) 
-9.4 nil -8.0 110 -0.9 
-12.1 0.9 66.0 0.71 [Ai 
-8.9 (25 96.0 [ee MEG 
-6.6 -0.2 20.0 0.82 8.5 
-7.1 nil 12.0 0.82 8.5 
-7.5 0.1 8.0 0.82 obo: 
-9.0 0.2 25.0 0.82 eS) 
-3.6 -0.2 20.0 0.82 So 
-5.9 0.8 -67.0 0.82 6.5 
-11.9 0.9 -64.0 0.82 8,5 
-3.4 -0.2 40 0.82 6.5 
-8.9 0.5 -10.0 0.82 B.5 
-5.5 1.8 104 2709 13.8 
-1.3 0.1 37.0 6.09 9.4 
-1./ (J85 92.0 8.31 14.7 
-6.9 ee 55.0 3.65 7A 
-1./ ies 160 133 -6.1 
-2.6 0.4 440 8.27 lal! 
-2.4 -0.1 29.0 0.90 6.7 
-2.8 18.0 673 8.59 “21.6 
-7,3 1.6 67.0 28 124 
-4.1 ie 70.0 7.16 “0,1 
-7.0 6.0 1.0 iA 3,1 
-6.4 6.4 -/0.0 14,280 El 
-5.9 oy 24.0 4.13 3.6 
-6.9 Q7 tt 114 155 6.8 
-7.6 40 69.0 478 55 
-4.1 85 65.0 132 6.1 
-4/ jue) 81.0 als 10.1 
-0.5 0.5 -5.0 21 8.1 
=o | i Hi 49.0 31.2 sae 
-6.0 na na 948 -27.5 
-7,3 Sid HES S08. 25 
-7.2 33) 166 721 8.2 
-8.9 1120 160 3,640 -0.4 
-2.8 6.6 440 19.9 8.5 
ee 49 108 3.88 flee 
-8.1 na na 15a 2.0 
-8.8 le 47.0 3125 6.8 
-2.6 na na 3.75 nil 
-9.2 ous 16.0 lew _ ae 


Source: Haver Analytics. *% change on previous quarter, annual rate. The Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast. SNot seasonally adjusted. ¥New series. **Year ending June. TLatest 3 months. #*3-month moving 
average. §§5-year yield. TDollar-denominated bonds. 





Markets 


In local currency 


United States S&P 500 
United States NAScomp 
China Shanghai Comp 
China Shenzhen Comp 
Japan Nikkei 225 


Japan Topix 


Britain FTSE 100 
Canada S&P TSX 


Euro area EURO STOXX 50 


France CAC 40 


Germany DAX* 


Italy FTSE/MIB 


Netherlands AEX 


Spain IBEX 35 
Poland WIG 


Russia RTS, $ terms 
Switzerland SMI 


Turkey BIST 1,430.7 0.3 -3.1 
Australia All Ord. 


Hong Kong Hang Seng 


India BSE 
Indonesia |DX 
Malaysia KLSE 





% change on: 

Index one Dec31st 

Jun 2nd week 2020 
4,208.1 0.3 126 
13,/56.3 0.1 6.7 
3,597.1 0.1 3.6 
2,400.9 0.9 3.1 
28,946.1 1.1 5h) 
1,942.3 1.1 16 
7,108.0 1.2 10.0 
19,971.2 [i BIENG 
4088.5 1.4 15.1 
6,521.5 2.0 17.5 
15,602.7 1.0 13.2 
25,3/9.7 2.4 14.2 
718.9 lel 15.1 
9,180.7 -0.2 13.7 
66,/58.0 Sno (Wel 
1,643.7 35 18.5 
11,470.4 1.1 WZ 
7,468.9 19 9.0 
29,297.6 0.5 7.6 
51,849.5 1.6 8.6 
6,031.6 3.7 0.9 
1,597.9 1.3 -1.8 





% change on: 





index one Dec3ist 

Jun 2nd week 2020 

Pakistan KSE 48,126.9 2.8 10.0 
Singapore STI 3,161.0 Om ile? 
South Korea KOSPI 3,224.2 1.8 22 
Taiwan TWI 17,1650 oo {Tone} 

Thailand SET eile 3.1 inlets 
Argentina MERV 62,659.5 10.7 275 
Brazil BVSP 129,601.4 45 8.9 
Mexico |PC 50,749.6 (7 [ee 
Egypt EGX 30 OVA -2.4 -6./ 
Israel TA-125 1,764.3 -0.5 ES 
Saudi Arabia Tadawul 10,656.8 1.8 22.6 
South Africa JSE AS 69,049.1 44 Ie2 
World, dev'd MSC 2,986.0 0.6 11.0 
Emerging markets MSCI 1338.5 i =6[ 

US corporate bonds, spread over Treasuries 

Dec 31st 

Basis points latest 2020 
Investment grade 118 136 
High-yield oar, 429 


Sources: Refinitiv Datastream; Standard & Poor's Global Fixed Income 


Research. *Total return index. 


Commodities 


The Economist commodity-price index 


2015=100 May 25th 
Dollar Index 
All Items 181.7 
Food i645 
Industrials 
All De sy a) 
Non-food agriculturals 171.9 
Metals 241.7 
Sterling Index 
All items 196.2 
Euro Index 
All items 164.6 
Gold 
$ per oz 1,892.0 
Brent 
$ per barrel 68.7 


Jun 1st* 


188.8 
(eth 


236.1 
165.8 
JL E\Oee) 


203.4 


171.0 


1,898.7 


70.4 


% change on 

month year 
on 73.4 
-2.1 49.6 
46 89.8 
=I dl 88.9 
7A 90.0 
0.1 26 
0.4 So 
6.8 on 
2.0 ES 


Sources: Bloomberg; CME Group; Cotlook; Refinitiv Datastream; 
Fastmarkets; FT; |CCO; ICO; ISO; Live Rice Index; LME; NZ Wool 
Services; Thompson Lloyd & Ewart; Urner Barry; WSJ. *Provisional. 


For more countries and additional data, visit 
Economist.com/indicators 





Graphic detail 


The Economist June 5th 2021 77 


> Image databases used to train facial-recognition programs reflect pervasive stereotypes 


Google Open Images, ratio of label frequency* 
in images of women v men, log scale 


Sports equipment 


American football 


Pitcher Football helmet Baseball 
oe ot et 
! eo 
oe 7° * is re *s , of 
a” 4,2 e 
o r = 
Barechested Soldier 
Player 
| | t t | | t I | i 
0.02 0.03 0.1 0.2 


ImageNet, ratio of label frequency* in images 
of dark-skinned v light-skinned people, log scale 


Student Cardiologist 


Gymnast ») 
ce, ae 
Big sister. ae 

4 
vs 


Ballet dancer “ 


Rich person 


0.02 0.03 0.1 0.2 


Bias in, bias out 


Fixing demographic skews in training 
data would make models more fair 


LGORITHMIC BIAS is often described as 
A; thorny technical problem. Machine- 
learning models can respond to almost any 
pattern—including ones that reflect dis- 
crimination. Their designers can explicitly 
prevent such tools from consuming cer- 
tain types of information, such as race or 
sex. Nonetheless, the use of related vari- 
ables, like someone’s address, can still 
cause models to perpetuate disadvantage. 

Ironing out all traces of bias is a daunt- 
ing task. Yet despite the growing attention 
paid to this problem, some of the lowest- 
hanging fruit remains unpicked. 

Every good model relies on training da- 
ta that reflect what it seeks to predict. This 
can sometimes be a full population, such 
as everyone convicted of a given crime. But 
modellers often have to settle for non-ran- 
dom samples. For uses like facial recogni- 
tion, models need enough cases from each 
demographic group to learn how to identi- 
fy members accurately. And when making 


Firefighter 


Public speaking 


Captain 


= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 


More common in pictures of 
Men< | »Women 


20 
| Happy 
a Toddler 
: bel 


* * 
oo 
Dance 






Vehicle 







Guitar 





Official 





Friendship 


Management Peeeuiman body 


0.3 1 2 3 


More common in pictures with 
Light skin © | > Dark skin 


Director Heir Carpenter 








Protester President 






Olympian 


®e5 


Patient 


Percussionist 


Yogi Prison guard 


Astronaut Military personnel 


| t 


03 1 , 3 


*Excluding labels used on <0.05% of images, or with sex/skin-colour imbalance below 20% 


forecasts, like trying to predict successful 
hires from recorded job interviews, the 
proportions of each group in training data 
should resemble those in the population. 

Many businesses compile private train- 
ing data. However, the two largest public 
image archives, Google Open Images and 
ImageNet—which together have 725,000 
pictures labelled by sex, and 27,000 that al- 
so record skin colour—are far from repre- 
sentative. In these collections, drawn from 
search engines and image-hosting sites, 
just 30-40% of photos are of women. Only 
5% of skin colours are listed as “dark”. 

Sex and race also sharply affect how 
people are depicted. Men are unusually 


United States, share of professional 
jobs held by women, % 






50 
Actual 
AO 
30 
Representation in 
ee ee ee Google Open Images 20 
SS ee eS SS ca == = SS ImageNet 
10 
0 


1940 50 60 70 80 90 2000 10 20 


Trumpeter 


ile aed - 


Farmer 





% of total 
0.01 0.1 1 10 


Veil 


Swimwear Jewellery High heels — Brassiere 


3 oy. egies Ja 


Bikini Dress Lipstick 
+ 
The share of images labelled “marriage” was 


100 times greater for women than for men 


| | ie y | | | i | | i ot | 


10 20 30 100 


Washerwoman 


First lady Rapper 


] Stranger 


Basketball player 
Schoolchild 


Travelling salesman 


q i l I fj t | t i | | 


10 20 30 


100 
Sources: ImageNet; Google Open Images; IPUMS 


likely to appear as skilled workers, whereas 
images of women disproportionately con- 
tain Swimwear or undergarments. Mach- 
ine-learning models regurgitate such pat- 
terns. One study trained an image-genera- 
tion algorithm on ImageNet, and found 
that it completed pictures of young wom- 
en's faces with low-cut tops or bikinis. 

Similarly, images with light skin often 
displayed professionals, such as cardiolo- 
gists. Those with dark skin had higher 
Shares of rappers, lower-class jobs like 
“washerwoman’” and even generic “strang- 
ers”. Thanks to the Obamas, “president” 
and “first lady” were also overrepresented. 

ImageNet is developing a tool to rebal- 
ance the demography of its photos. And 
private firms may use less biased archives. 
However, commercial products do show 
signs of skewed data. One study of three 
programs that identify sex in photos found 
far more errors for dark-skinned women 
than for light-skinned men. 

Making image or video data more repre- 
sentative would not fix imbalances that re- 
flect real-world gaps, such as the high 
number of dark-skinned basketball play- 
ers. But for people trying to clear passport 
control, avoid police stops based on securi- 
ty cameras or break into industries run by 
white men, correcting exaggerated demo- 
graphic disparities would surely help. @ 





7” Obituary Josep Almudever 


3 prea. 
tee) a A he 





fe 


The colours of dawn 


Josep Almudéver Mateu, the last known member of the 
International Brigades, died on May 23rd, aged 101 


LD SOLDIERS often lose their enthusiasm for fighting. They 
O speak instead of peace and, in fading voices, warn the young 
against the folly of war. Not so Josep Almudeéver. At the drop of a 
hat he would unfurl the Spanish Republican flag he always carried 
with him, yellow, red and purple, the colours of dawn, and drape it 
proudly round his shoulders. He would rather forget to eat, than 
forget that flag. Then he would raise his clenched fist, shout “Viva 
el socialismo!” in a voice still carrying and clear, and break into a 
Republican song. No stopping him. 

He was still at heart the boy of 17 who tried all the recruitment 
offices round his village, Alcasser in the province of Valencia, to 
enlist in the fight to save the Second Republic from Francisco 
Franco's fascists. The moment Franco’s coup against the elected 
government ignited the civil war, in July 1936, he had to join up. He 
was too young, but “You won't stop him marching,” his father told 
the secretary at the Socialist Party office, who then obligingly ac- 
cepted his age as19. He was still17, on the bleak, freezing front line 
at Teruel in Aragon where the Republican forces were trying to dis- 
lodge Franco’s troops, when shrapnel ploughed into his chest and 
shoulder. But it didn’t hurt for long and, after some weeks, he was 
looking for a front line again. 

After the defeat at Teruel, where the airpower of Nazi Germany 
came to Franco’s aid, many Republicans lost stomach for the fight. 
He was all the keener. His youth was still a problem, though—un- 
less he enlisted as a foreigner. Luckily he was both French and 
Spanish, born in Marseille when his valenciano father was looking 
for work there. So in May 1938, flaunting his French side, he joined 
the International Brigades. He was now part of a force of some 
40,000 fighters who had flocked to Spain to save the world from 
fascism, by saving the Republic first. They came from all over Eu- 
rope, ASia and America, and in every left-wing colour: socialists, 
communists, anarchists and Trotskyists, with a fringe of writers, 


The Economist June 5th 2021 


drifters and romantics. It was like being on a medieval crusade, 
but with rifles and artillery (when it turned up) anda role as shock 
troops, helping as needed. The Brigades were his ideal of what the 
Left could be, like the Popular Front forged from Spain’s warring 
parties in 1936: all factions uniting to bring down capitalism and 
raise up the working class. 

His brigade, 129, was the latest to be formed and, as it turned 
out, the last. The fighters were fresh, even scoring small victories 
in the general Republican retreat. Huge previous losses meant that 
most brigadistas by then were Spaniards, but his own division had 
a Dutchman, a German, a Swiss, an American (their chief mechan- 
ic), even a Chinaman. His regular comrade, David, was Canadian. 
They could barely talk to each other, but got on fine. There were no 
conflicts. Others reported plenty of strife in the Brigades, as well 
as the overpowering camp smell of rotting oats and urine, the 
same old bean stew eaten out of dirty tins, and the tedium of 
weeks spent waiting for orders from their Republican command- 
ers. He did not even mind the waiting much. 

Besides, as he kept stressing, the Republic did not lose the war. 
It was betrayed by the non-intervention pact signed by the major 
Western powers 1n 1936, pledging to keep out of the struggle. When 
he had marched away from Alcasser on that shining September 
morning, the people cheering mightily, he carried an antiquated 
rifle and no bullets, because the French now refused to send the 
munitions which Spain had ordered and paid for. Fascist Italy and 
Germany, however, ignored the pact and piled in on Franco’s side, 
as at Teruel. Pobre Republica, poor Republic, he sighed. Against 
criminals like those, it hadn’t stood a chance. As for the idea that 
Spain’s was a “civil war”, how stupid that was. It was a world war 
fought on one small, bloody stage. 

Everything might have been different. When the Republic was 
first declared in 1931, he saw freedom explode in the streets. The 
new government brought in secular schools and votes for women, 
but Catholic opponents gave the poor food and bedsheets, and 
votes slipped away. He began to read newspapers to the local peas- 
ants, two-thirds of them illiterate, explaining that socialism 
would build a better world. He still believed it would when, in Oc- 
tober 1938, the Republican government doomed itself by telling all 
its foreign fighters to go home. It was hoping for the same gesture 
from Franco, with his thousands of Germans and Italians and Mo- 
roccans, but those did not leave. Pobre Republica. 

He did not go to France, as he could have done. Instead he lin- 
gered unhappily in Valencia, and was arrested. He was sent for 
several months to the Albatera concentration camp, where he was 
made to watch the executions of Republican fighters as young as 
himself. Their screams still haunted him and filled his eyes with 
tears. After more months in an ordinary prison he was released, 
but went on fighting as a maquti in the north-east until, in 1947, he 
fled into definitive exile at Pamiers, near Toulouse. He had a young 
family now, and could not keep taking risks. He settled to his fa- 
ther’s trade of building and bricklaying. 

Nothing , however, dulled his passionate interest in the pro- 
gress or non-progress of the Left. Its divisions continued to frus- 
trate him, both in France and in Spain, to which he was not al- 
lowed to return until1965. Why was it so hard for the Socialists and 
Podemos to unite for the good of the workers? Because they were 
still in thrall to capitalists, as the Second Republic, too, had turned 
out to be. The rich always ended up winning, he would say, scorn- 
fully rubbing his fingertips together. Money ruled. The king, “Col- 
onel” Juan Carlos as he called him, had sent him a million pesetas 
for enduring prison, but he wouldn't touch it. He didn’t want it. 

Instead, in his flatin Pamiers, his riches lay around him: post- 
ers, scarves, medals and plaques glowing with yellow, red and pur- 
ple. Che Guevara’s face was on the wall, and beside it his own 
young face, with the same rapt expression of waiting for the great 
socialist dawn. If Spain still needed him, he would take up arms. 
And on foot, ancient but agile, he would cross the Pyrenees. @ 


Energy Is life. 

We all need it 

and it’s a source of progress. 

So today, to contribute to 

the sustainable develooment of the planet 
facing the climate challenge, 

we are moving forward, together, 

towards new energies. 

Energy is reinventing itself, 
and this energy journey Is Ours. 

Our ambition is to be a world-class player 
in the energy transition. 

That is why 


Total is transforming and 
becoming TotalEnergies. 





TotalEnergies 






